<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>XXVIII</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-28" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2 id="id03979" style="margin-top: 4em">XXVIII</h2>
			<h4 id="id03980" style="margin-top: 2em">I.</h4>
			<p id="id03981">She lay out on the moor, under the August sun. Her hands were pressed like a bandage over her eyes. When she lifted them she caught the faint pink glow of their flesh. The light throbbed and nickered as she pressed it out, and let it in.</p>
			<p id="id03982">The sheep couched, panting, in the shade of the stone covers. She lay so still that the peewits had stopped their cry.</p>
			<p id="id03983">Something bothered her….</p>
			<p id="id03984"><i>And in the east one pure, prophetic star</i>—one pure prophetic star—<i>Trembles between the darkness and the dawn</i>.</p>
			<p id="id03985">What you wrote last year. No reason why you shouldn't write modern plays in blank verse if you wanted to. Only people didn't say those things. You couldn't do it that way.</p>
			<p id="id03986">Let the thing go. Tear it to bits and burn them in the kitchen fire.</p>
			<p id="id03987">If you lay still, perfectly still, and stopped thinking the other thing would come back.</p>
			<p id="id03988">   <i>In dreams He has made you wise,<br/>
			    With the wisdom of silence and prayer,<br/>
			    God, who has blinded your eyes,<br/>
			    With the dusk of your hair</i>.<br/></p>
			<p id="id03989">The Mother. The Mother. Mother and Son.</p>
			<p id="id03990" style="margin-left: 4%; margin-right: 4%"><i>You and he are near akin. Would you slay your brother-in-sin? What he does yourself shall do</i>—</p>
			<p id="id03991">That was the Son's hereditary destiny.</p>
			<p id="id03992">Lying on her back under Karva, she dreamed her "Dream-Play"; saying the unfinished verses over and over again, so as to remember them when she got home. She was unutterably happy.</p>
			<p id="id03993">She thought: "I don't care what happens so long as I can go on."</p>
			<p id="id03994">She jumped up to her feet. "I must go and see what Mamma's doing."</p>
			<p id="id03995">Her mother was sewing in the drawing-room and waiting for her to come to tea. She looked up and smiled.</p>
			<p id="id03996">"What are you so pleased about?" she said.</p>
			<p id="id03997">"Oh, nothing."</p>
			<p id="id03998">Mamma was adorable, sitting there like a dove on its nest, dressed in a dove's dress, grey on grey, turning dove's eyes to you in soft, crinkly lids. She held her head on one side, smiling at some secret that she kept. Mamma was happy, too.</p>
			<p id="id03999">"What are you looking such an angel for?"</p>
			<p id="id04000">Mamma lifted up her work, showing an envelope that lay on her lap, the crested flap upwards, a blue gun-carriage on a white ground, and the motto: "<i>Ubique</i>."</p>
			<p id="id04001">Catty had been into Reyburn to shop and had called for the letters. Mark was coming home in April.</p>
			<p id="id04002">"Oh—Mamma—"</p>
			<p id="id04003">"There's a letter for you, Mary."</p>
			<p id="id04004">(Not from Mark.)</p>
			<p id="id04005">"If he gets that appointment he won't go back." She thought: "She'll never be unhappy again. She'll never be afraid he'll get cholera."</p>
			<p id="id04006">For a minute their souls met and burned together in the joy they shared.</p>
			<p id="id04007">Then broke apart.</p>
			<p id="id04008">"Aren't you going to show me Mr. Sutcliffe's letter?"</p>
			<p id="id04009">"Why should I?"</p>
			<p id="id04010">"You don't mean to say there's anything in it I can't see?"</p>
			<p id="id04011">"You can see it if you like. There's nothing in it."</p>
			<p id="id04012">That was why she hadn't wanted her to see it. For anything there was in it you might never have known him. But Mrs. Sutcliffe had sent her love.</p>
			<p id="id04013">Mamma looked up sharply.</p>
			<p id="id04014">"Did you write to him, Mary?"</p>
			<p id="id04015">"Of course I did."</p>
			<p id="id04016">"You'll not write again. He's let you know pretty plainly he isn't going to be bothered."</p>
			<p id="id04017">(It wasn't that. It couldn't be that.)</p>
			<p id="id04018">"Did they say anything more about your going there?"</p>
			<p id="id04019">"No."</p>
			<p id="id04020">"That ought to show you then…. But as long as you live you'll give yourself away to people who don't want you."</p>
			<p id="id04021">"I'd rather you didn't talk about them."</p>
			<p id="id04022">"I should like to know what I <i>can</i> talk about," said Mamma.</p>
			<p id="id04023">She folded up her work and laid it in the basket.</p>
			<p id="id04024">Her voice dropped from the sharp note of resentment.</p>
			<p id="id04025">"I wish you'd go and see if those asters have come."</p>
			<h4 id="id04026" style="margin-top: 2em">II.</h4>
			<p id="id04027">The asters had come. She had carried out the long, shallow boxes into the garden. She had left her mother kneeling beside them, looking with adoration into the large, round, innocent faces, white and purple, mauve and magenta and amethyst and pink. If the asters had not come the memory of the awful things they had said to each other would have remained with them till bed-time; but Mamma would be happy with the asters like a child with its toys, planning where they were to go and planting them.</p>
			<p id="id04028">She went up to her room. After thirteen years she had still the same childish pleasure in the thought that it was hers and couldn't be taken from her, because nobody else wanted it.</p>
			<p id="id04029">The bookshelves stretched into three long rows on the white wall above her bed to hold the books Mr. Sutcliffe had given her; a light blue row for the Thomas Hardys; a dark blue for the George Merediths; royal blue and gold for the Rudyard Kiplings. And in the narrow upright bookcase in the arm of the T facing her writing-table, Mark's books: the Homers and the Greek dramatists. Their backs had faded from puce colour to drab.</p>
			<p id="id04030">Mark's books.—When she looked at them she could still feel her old, childish lust for possession, her childish sense of insecurity, of defeat. And something else. The beginning of thinking things about Mamma. She could see herself standing in Mark's bedroom at Five Elms and Mamma with her hands on Mark's books. She could hear herself saying, "You're afraid."</p>
			<p id="id04031">"What did I think Mamma was afraid of?"</p>
			<p id="id04032">Mamma was happy out there with the asters.</p>
			<p id="id04033">There would be three hours before dinner.</p>
			<p id="id04034">She began setting down the fragments of the "Dream-Play" that had come to her: then the outlines. She saw very clearly and precisely how it would have to be. She was intensely happy.</p>
			<p id="id04035">* * * * *</p>
			<p id="id04036">She was still thinking of it as she went across the Green to the post office, instead of wondering why the postmistress had sent for her, and why Miss Horn waited for her by the house door at the side, or why she looked at her like that, with a sort of yearning pity and fear. She followed her into the parlour behind the post office.</p>
			<p id="id04037">Suddenly she was awake to the existence of this parlour and its yellow cane-bottomed chairs and round table with the maroon cloth and the white alabaster lamp that smelt. The orange envelope lay on the maroon cloth. Miss Horn covered it with her hand.</p>
			<p id="id04038">"It's for Mr. Dan," she said. "I daren't send it to the house lest your mother should get it."</p>
			<p id="id04039">She gave it up with a slow, unwilling gesture.</p>
			<p id="id04040">"It's bad news, Miss Mary."</p>
			<p id="id04041">"<i>Your Brother Died This Evening</i>."</p>
			<p id="id04042">Her heart stopped, staggered and went on again. <i>"Poona"</i>—Mark—</p>
			<p id="id04043">"<i>Your Brother Died This Evening</i>.—SYMONDS."</p>
			<p id="id04044">"This evening" was yesterday. Mark had died yesterday.</p>
			<p id="id04045">Her heart stopped again. She had a sudden feeling of suffocation and sickness.</p>
			<p id="id04046">Her mind left off following the sprawl of the thick grey-black letters on the livid pink form.</p>
			<p id="id04047">It woke again to the extraordinary existence of Miss Horn's parlour. It went back to Mark, slowly, by the way it had come, by the smell of the lamp, by the orange envelope on the maroon cloth.</p>
			<p id="id04048">Mark. And something else.</p>
			<p id="id04049">Mamma—Mamma. She would have to know.</p>
			<p id="id04050">Miss Horn still faced her, supporting herself by her spread hands pressed down on to the table. Her eyes had a look of gentle, helpless interrogation, as if she said, "What are you going to do about it?"</p>
			<p id="id04051">She did all the necessary things; asked for a telegram form, filled it in: "<i>Send Details</i>, MARY OLIVIER"; and addressed it to Symonds of "E" Company. And all the time, while her hand moved over the paper, she was thinking, "I shall have to tell Mamma."</p>
			<h4 id="id04052" style="margin-top: 2em">III.</h4>
			<p id="id04053">The five windows of the house stared out at her across the Green. She avoided them by cutting through Horn's yard and round by the Back Lane into the orchard. She was afraid that her mother would see her before she had thought how she would tell her that Mark was dead. She shut herself into her room to think.</p>
			<p id="id04054">She couldn't think.</p>
			<p id="id04055">She dragged herself from the window seat to the chair by the writing-table and from the chair to the bed.</p>
			<p id="id04056">She could still feel her heart staggering and stopping. Once she thought it was going to stop altogether. She had a sudden pang of joy. "If it would stop altogether—I should go to Mark. Nothing would matter. I shouldn't have to tell Mamma that he's dead." But it always went on again.</p>
			<p id="id04057">She thought of Mark now without any feeling at all except that bodily distress. Her mind was fixed in one centre of burning, lucid agony. Mamma.</p>
			<p id="id04058">"I can't tell her. I can't. It'll kill her…. I don't see how she's to live if Mark's dead…. I shall send for Aunt Bella. She can do it. Or I might ask Mrs. Waugh. Or Mr. Rollitt."</p>
			<p id="id04059">She knew she wouldn't do any of these things. She would have to tell her.</p>
			<p id="id04060">She heard the clock strike the half hour. Half-past five. Not yet. "When it strikes seven I shall go and tell Mamma."</p>
			<p id="id04061">She lay down on her bed and listened for the strokes of the clock. She felt nothing but an immense fatigue, an appalling heaviness. Her back and arms were loaded with weights that held her body down on to the bed.</p>
			<p id="id04062">"I shall never be able to get up and tell her."</p>
			<p id="id04063">Six. Half-past. At seven she got up and went downstairs. Through the open side door she saw her mother working in the garden.</p>
			<p id="id04064">She would have to get her into the house.</p>
			<p id="id04065">"Mamma—darling."</p>
			<p id="id04066">But Mamma wouldn't come in. She was planting the last aster in the row. She went on scooping out the hole for it, slowly and deliberately, with her trowel, and patting the earth about it with wilful hands. There was a little smudge of grey earth above the crinkles in her soft, sallow-white forehead.</p>
			<p id="id04067">"You wait," she said.</p>
			<p id="id04068">She smiled like a child pleased with itself for taking its own way.</p>
			<p id="id04069">Mary waited.</p>
			<p id="id04070">She thought: "Three hours ago I was angry with her. I was angry with her. And Mark was dead then. And when she read his letter. He was dead yesterday."</p>
			<h4 id="id04071" style="margin-top: 2em">IV.</h4>
			<p id="id04072">Time was not good to you. Time was cruel. Time made you see.</p>
			<p id="id04073">Yet somehow they had gone through time. Nights of August and September when you got up before daybreak to listen at her door. Days when you did nothing. Mamma sat upright in her chair with her hands folded on her lap. She kept her back to the window: you saw her face darkening in the dusk. When the lamp came she raised her arm and the black shawl hung from it and hid her face. Nights of insane fear when you <i>had</i> to open her door and look in to see whether she were alive or dead. Days when you were afraid to speak, afraid to look at each other. Nights when you couldn't sleep for wondering how Mark had died. They might have told you. They might have told you in one word. They didn't, because they couldn't; because the word was too awful. They would never say how Mark died. Mamma thought he had died of cholera.</p>
			<p id="id04074">You started at sounds, at the hiss of the flame in the grate, the fall of the ashes on the hearth, the tinkling of the front door bell.</p>
			<p id="id04075">You heard Catty slide back the bolt. People muttered on the doorstep. You saw them go back past the window, quietly, their heads turned away. They were ashamed.</p>
			<p id="id04076">You began to go out. You walked slowly, weighted more than ever by your immense, inexplicable fatigue. When you saw people coming you tried to go quicker; when you spoke to them you panted and felt absurd. A coldness came over you when you saw Mrs. Waugh and Miss Frewin with their heads on one side and their shocked, grieved faces. You smiled at them as you panted, but they wouldn't smile back. Their grief was too great. They would never get over it.</p>
			<p id="id04077">You began to watch for the Indian mail.</p>
			<p id="id04078">One day the letter came. You read blunt, jerky sentences that told you Mark had died suddenly, in the mess room, of heart failure. Captain Symonds said he thought you would want to know exactly how it happened…. "Well, we were 'cock-fighting,' if you know what that is, after dinner. Peters is the heaviest man in our battery, and Major Olivier was carrying him on his back. We oughtn't to have let him do it. But we didn't know there was anything wrong with his heart. He didn't know it himself. We thought he was fooling when he dropped on the floor…. Everything was done that could be done…. He couldn't have suffered…. He was happy up to the last minute of his life—shouting with laughter."</p>
			<p id="id04079">She saw the long lighted room. She saw it with yellow walls and yellow lights, with a long, white table and clear, empty wine-glasses. Men in straw-coloured bamboo armchairs turning round to look. She couldn't see their faces. She saw Mark's face. She heard Mark's voice, shouting with laughter. She saw Mark lying dead on the floor. The men stood up suddenly. Somebody without a face knelt down and bent over him.</p>
			<p id="id04080">It was as if she had never known before that Mark was dead and knew it now. She cried for the first time since his death, not because he was dead, but because he had died like that—playing.</p>
			<p id="id04081">He should have died fighting. Why couldn't he? There was the Boer War and the Khyber Pass and Chitral and the Soudan. He had missed them all. He had never had what he had wanted.</p>
			<p id="id04082">And Mamma who had cried so much had left off crying.</p>
			<p id="id04083">"The poor man couldn't have liked writing that letter, Mary. You needn't be angry with him."</p>
			<p id="id04084">"I'm not angry with him. I'm angry because Mark died like that."</p>
			<p id="id04085">"Heigh-h—" The sound in her mother's throat was like a sigh and a sob and a laugh jerking out contempt.</p>
			<p id="id04086">"You don't know what you're talking about. He's gone, Mary. If you were his mother it wouldn't matter to you how he died so long as he didn't suffer. So long as he didn't die of cholera."</p>
			<p id="id04087">"If he could have got what he wanted—"</p>
			<p id="id04088">"What's that you say?"</p>
			<p id="id04089">"If he could have got what he wanted."</p>
			<p id="id04090">"None of us ever get what we want in this world," said Mamma.</p>
			<p id="id04091">She thought: "It was her son—<i>her</i> son she loved, not Mark's real, secret self. He's got away from her at last—altogether."</p>
			<h4 id="id04092" style="margin-top: 2em">V.</h4>
			<p id="id04093">She sewed.</p>
			<p id="id04094">Every day she went to the linen cupboard and gathered up all the old towels and sheets that wanted mending, and she sewed.</p>
			<p id="id04095">Her mother had a book in her lap. She noticed that if she left off sewing Mamma would take up the book and read, and when she began again she would put it down.</p>
			<p id="id04096">Her thoughts went from Mamma to Mark, from Mark to Mamma. She used to<br/>
			be pleased when she saw you sewing. "Nothing will ever please her now.<br/>
			She'll never be happy again…. I ought to have died instead of Mark….<br/>
			That's Anthony Trollope she's reading."<br/></p>
			<p id="id04097">The long sheet kept slipping. It dragged on her arm. Her arms felt swollen, and heavy like bars of lead. She let them drop to her knees…. Little Mamma.</p>
			<p id="id04098">She picked up the sheet again.</p>
			<p id="id04099">"Why are you sewing, Mary?"</p>
			<p id="id04100">"I must do <i>something</i>."</p>
			<p id="id04101">"Why don't you take a book and read?"</p>
			<p id="id04102">"I can't read."</p>
			<p id="id04103">"Well—why don't you go out for a walk?"</p>
			<p id="id04104">"Too tired."</p>
			<p id="id04105">"You'd better go and lie down in your room."</p>
			<p id="id04106">She hated her room. Everything in it reminded her of the day after Mark died. The rows of new books reminded her; and Mark's books in the narrow bookcase. They were hers. She would never be asked to give them back again. Yesterday she had taken out the Aeschylus and looked at it, and she had forgotten that Mark was dead and had felt glad because it was hers. To-day she had been afraid to see its shabby drab back lest it should remind her of that, too.</p>
			<p id="id04107">Her mother sighed and put her book away. She sat with her hands before her, waiting.</p>
			<p id="id04108">Her face had its old look of reproach and disapproval, the drawn, irritated look you saw when you came between her and Mark. As if your grief for Mark came between her and her grief, as if, deep down inside her, she hated your grief as she had hated your love for him, without knowing that she hated it.</p>
			<p id="id04109">Suddenly she turned on you her blurred, wounded eyes.</p>
			<p id="id04110">"Mary, when you look at me like that I feel as if you knew everything I'm thinking."</p>
			<p id="id04111">"I don't. I shall never know."</p>
			<p id="id04112">Supposing all the time she knew what you were thinking? Supposing Mark knew? Supposing the dead knew?</p>
			<p id="id04113">She was glad of the aching of her heart that dragged her thought down and numbed it.</p>
			<p id="id04114">The January twilight crept between them. She put down her sewing. At the stroke of the clock her mother stirred in her chair.</p>
			<p id="id04115">"What day of the month is it?" she said.</p>
			<p id="id04116">"The twenty-fifth."</p>
			<p id="id04117">"Then—yesterday was your birthday…. Poor Mary. I forgot…. I sit here, thinking. My own thoughts. They make me forget…. Come here."</p>
			<p id="id04118">She went to her, drawn by a passion stronger than her passion for Mark, her hard, proud passion for Mark.</p>
			<p id="id04119">Her mother put up her face. She stooped down and kissed her passionately, on her mouth, her wet cheeks, her dove's eyes, her dove's eyelids. She crouched on the floor beside her, leaning her head against her lap. Mamma's hand held it there.</p>
			<p id="id04120">"Are you twenty-nine or thirty?"</p>
			<p id="id04121">"Thirty."</p>
			<p id="id04122">"You don't look it. You've always been such a little thing…. You remember the silly question you used to ask me? 'Mamma—would you love me better if I was two?'"</p>
			<p id="id04123">She remembered. Long ago. When she came teasing for kisses. The silly question.</p>
			<p id="id04124">"You remember <i>that</i>?"</p>
			<p id="id04125">"Yes. I remember."</p>
			<p id="id04126">Deep down inside her there was something you would never know.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
