<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>XXI</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-21" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2 id="id02294" style="margin-top: 4em">XXI</h2>
			<h4 id="id02295" style="margin-top: 2em">I.</h4>
			<p id="id02296">They hated the piano. They had pushed it away against the dark outside wall. Its strings were stiff with cold, and when the rain came its wooden hammers swelled so that two notes struck together in the bass.</p>
			<p id="id02297">The piano-tuner made them move it to the inner wall in the large, bright place that belonged to the cabinet. Mamma was annoyed because Mary had taken the piano-tuner’s part.</p>
			<p id="id02298">Mamma loved the cabinet. She couldn’t bear to see it standing in the piano’s dark corner where the green Chinese bowls hardly showed behind the black glimmer of the panes. The light fell full on the ragged, faded silk of the piano, and on the long scar across its lid. It was like a poor, shabby relation.</p>
			<p id="id02299">It stood there in the quiet room, with its lid shut, patient, reproachful, waiting for you to come and play on it.</p>
			<p id="id02300">When Mary thought of the piano her heart beat faster, her fingers twitched, the full, sensitive tips tingled and ached to play. When she couldn’t play she lay awake at night thinking of the music.</p>
			<p id="id02301">She was trying to learn the Sonato <i xml:lang="it">Appassionata</i>, going through it bar by bar, slowly and softly, so that nobody outside the room should hear it. That was better than not playing it at all. But sometimes you would forget, and as soon as you struck the loud chords in the first movement Papa would come in and stop you. And the Sonata would go on sounding inside you, trying to make you play it, giving you no peace.</p>
			<p id="id02302">Towards six o’clock she listened for his feet in the flagged passage. When the front door slammed behind him she rushed to the piano. There might be a whole hour before Roddy fetched him from the Buck Hotel. If you could only reach the last movement, the two thundering chords, and then⁠—the <i xml:lang="it">Presto</i>.</p>
			<p id="id02303">The music beat on the thick stone walls of the room and was beaten back, its fine, live throbbing blunted by overtones of discord. You longed to open all the doors and windows of the house, to push back the stone walls and let it out.</p>
			<p id="id02304">Terrible minutes to six when Mamma’s face watched and listened, when she knew what you were thinking. You kept on looking at the clock, you wondered whether this time Papa would really go. You hoped⁠—</p>
			<p id="id02305">Mamma’s eyes hurt you. They said, “She doesn’t care what becomes of him so long as she can play.”</p>
			<h4 id="id02306" style="margin-top: 2em">II.</h4>
			<p id="id02307">Sometimes the wounded, mutilated <i xml:lang="it">Allegro</i> would cry inside you all day, imploring you to finish it, to let it pour out its life in joy.</p>
			<p id="id02308">When it left off the white sound patterns of poems came instead. They floated down through the dark as she lay on her back in her hard, narrow bed. Out of doors, her feet, muffled in wet moor grass, went to a beat, a clang.</p>
			<p id="id02309">She would never play well. At any minute her father’s voice or her mother’s eyes would stiffen her fingers and stop them. She knew what she would do; she had always known. She would make poems. They couldn’t hear you making poems. They couldn’t see your thoughts falling into sound patterns.</p>
			<p id="id02310">Only part of the pattern would appear at once while the rest of it went on sounding from somewhere a long way off. When all the parts came together the poem was made. You felt as if you had made it long ago, and had forgotten it and remembered.</p>
			<h4 id="id02311" style="margin-top: 2em">III.</h4>
			<p id="id02312">The room held her close, cold and white, a nun’s cell. If you counted the window-place it was shaped like a cross. The door at the foot, the window at the head, bookshelves at the end of each arm. A kitchen lamp with a tin reflector, on a table, stood in the breast of the cross. Its flame was so small that she had to turn it on to her work like a lantern.</p>
			<p id="id02313">“Dumpetty, dumpetty dum. Tell them that Bion is dead; he is dead, young Bion, the shepherd. And with him music is dead and Dorian poetry perished⁠—”</p>
			<p id="id02314">She had the conceited, exciting thought: “I am translating Moschus, the<br/>
			Funeral Song for Bion.”<br/></p>
			<p id="id02315">Moschus was Bion’s friend. She wondered whether he had been happy or unhappy, making his funeral song.</p>
			<p id="id02316">If you could translate it all: if you could only make patterns out of<br/>
			English sounds that had the hardness and stillness of the Greek.<br/></p>
			<p id="id02317">“ ‘Archet’, Sikelikai, to pentheos, archet’ Moisai,<br/>
			 adones hai pukinoisin oduramenai poti phullois.’ ”<br/></p>
			<p id="id02318">The wind picked at the pane. Through her thick tweed coat she could feel the air of the room soak like cold water to her skin. She curved her aching hands over the hot globe of the lamp.</p>
			<p id="id02319">—Oduromenai. Mourning? No. You thought of black crape, bunched up weepers, red faces.</p>
			<p id="id02320">The wick spluttered; the flame leaned from the burner, gave a skip and went out.</p>
			<p id="id02321">Oduromenai⁠—Grieving; perhaps.</p>
			<p id="id02322">Suddenly she thought of Maurice Jourdain.</p>
			<p id="id02323">She saw him standing in the field path. She heard him say “Talk to <em>me</em>. I’m alive. I’m here. I’ll listen. I’ll never misunderstand.” She saw his worn eyelids; his narrow, yellowish teeth.</p>
			<p id="id02324">Supposing he was dead⁠—</p>
			<p id="id02325">She would forget about him for months together; then suddenly she would remember him like that. Being happy and excited made you remember. She tried not to see his eyelids and his teeth. They didn’t matter.</p>
			<h4 id="id02326" style="margin-top: 2em">IV.</h4>
			<p id="id02327">The season of ungovernable laughter had begun.</p>
			<p id="id02328">“Roddy, they’ll hear us. We m‑m‑mustn’t.”</p>
			<p id="id02329">“I’m not. I’m blowing my nose.”</p>
			<p id="id02330">“I wish <em>I</em> could make it sound like that.”</p>
			<p id="id02331">They stood on the Kendals’ doorstep, in the dark, under the snow. Snow powdered the flagstone path swept ready for the New Year’s party.</p>
			<p id="id02332">“Think,” she said, “their poor party. It would be awful of us.”</p>
			<p id="id02333">Roddy rang. As they waited they began to laugh again. Helpless, ruinous, agonising laughter.</p>
			<p id="id02334">“Oh⁠—oh⁠—I can hear Martha coming. <em>Do</em> something. You might be unbuckling my snow-shoes.”</p>
			<p id="id02335">The party was waiting for them in the drawing-room. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Dr.</abbr> Charles. Miss Louisa Wright, stiff fragility. A child’s face blurred and delicately weathered; features in innocent, low relief. Pale hair rolled into an insubstantial puff above each ear. Speedwell eyes, fading milkily. Hurt eyes, disappointed eyes. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Dr.</abbr> Charles had disappointed her.</p>
			<p id="id02336">Dorsy Heron, tall and straight. Shy hare’s face trying to look austere.</p>
			<p id="id02337">Norman Waugh, sulky and superior, in a corner.</p>
			<p id="id02338">As Roddy came in everybody but Norman Waugh turned round and stared at him with sudden, happy smiles. He was so beautiful that it made people happy to look at him. His very name, Rodney Olivier, sounded more beautiful than other people’s names.</p>
			<p id="id02339">Dorsy Heron’s shy hare’s eyes tried to look away and couldn’t. Her little high, red nose got redder.</p>
			<p id="id02340">And every now and then <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Dr.</abbr> Charles looked at Rodney, a grave, considering look, as if he knew something about him that Rodney didn’t know.</p>
			<h4 id="id02341" style="margin-top: 2em">V.</h4>
			<p id="id02342">“She shall play what she likes,” <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Sutcliffe said. He had come in late, without his wife.</p>
			<p id="id02343">She was going to play to them. They always asked you to play.</p>
			<p id="id02344">She thought: “It’ll be all right. They won’t listen; they’ll go on talking. I’ll play something so soft and slow that they won’t hear it. I shall be alone, listening to myself.”</p>
			<p id="id02345">She played the first movement of the Moonlight Sonata. A beating heart, a grieving voice; beautiful, quiet grief; it couldn’t disturb them.</p>
			<p id="id02346">Suddenly they all left off talking. They were listening. Each note sounded pure and sweet, as if it went out into an empty room. They came close up, one by one, on tiptoe, with slight creakings and rustlings, Miss Kendal, Louisa Wright, Dorsy Heron. Their eyes were soft and quiet like the music.</p>
			<p id="id02347"><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Sutcliffe sat where he could see her. He was far away from the place where she heard herself playing, but she could feel his face turned on her like a light.</p>
			<p id="id02348">The first movement died on its two chords. Somebody was saying “How beautifully she plays.” Life and warmth flowed into her. Exquisite, tingling life and warmth. “Go on. Go on.” <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Sutcliffe’s voice sounded miles away beyond the music.</p>
			<p id="id02349">She went on into the lovely <i xml:lang="it">Allegretto</i>. She could see their hushed faces leaning nearer. You could make them happy by playing to them. They loved you because you made them happy.</p>
			<p id="id02350"><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Sutcliffe had got up; he had come closer.</p>
			<p id="id02351">She was playing the <i xml:lang="it">Presto agitato</i>. It flowed smoothly under her fingers, at an incredible pace, with an incredible certainty.</p>
			<p id="id02352">Something seemed to be happening over there, outside the place where she heard the music. Martha came in and whispered to the Doctor. The Doctor whispered to Roddy. Roddy started up and they went out together.</p>
			<p id="id02353">She thought: “Papa again.” But she was too happy to care. Nothing mattered so long as she could listen to herself playing the Moonlight Sonata.</p>
			<p id="id02354">Under the music she was aware of Miss Kendal stooping over her, pressing her shoulder, saying something. She stood up. Everybody was standing up, looking frightened.</p>
			<p id="id02355">Outside, in the hall, she saw Catty, crying. She went past her over the open threshold where the snow lay like a light. She couldn’t stay to find her snow-shoes and her coat.</p>
			<p id="id02356">The track across the Green struck hard and cold under her slippers. The tickling and trickling of the snow felt like the play of cold light fingers on her skin. Her fear was a body inside her body; it ached and dragged, stone cold and still.</p>
			<h4 id="id02357" style="margin-top: 2em">VI.</h4>
			<p id="id02358">The basin kept on slipping from the bed. She could see its pattern⁠—reddish flowers and green leaves and curlykews⁠—under the splashings of mustard and water. She felt as if it must slip from her fingers and be broken. When she pressed it tighter to the edge of the mattress the rim struck against Papa’s breast.</p>
			<p id="id02359">He lay stretched out on the big yellow birchwood bed. The curtains were drawn back, holding the sour smell of sickness in their fluted folds.</p>
			<p id="id02360">Papa’s body made an enormous mound under the green eiderdown. It didn’t move. A little fluff of down that had pricked its way through the cover still lay where it had settled; Papa’s head still lay where it had dropped; the forefinger still pointed at the fluff of down.</p>
			<p id="id02361">Papa’s head was thrown stiffly back on the high pillows; it sank in, weighted with the blood that flushed his face. Around it on the white linen there was a spatter and splash of mustard and water. His beard clung to his chin, soaked in the yellowish stain. He breathed with a loud, grating and groaning noise.</p>
			<p id="id02362">Her ears were so tired with listening to this noise that sometimes they would go to sleep for a minute or two. Then it would wake them suddenly and she would begin to cry again.</p>
			<p id="id02363">You could stop crying if you looked steadily at the little fluff of down.<br/>
			At each groaning breath it quivered and sank and quivered.<br/></p>
			<p id="id02364">Roddy sat by the dressing-table. He stared, now at his clenched hands, now at his face in the glass, as if he hated it, as if he hated himself.</p>
			<p id="id02365">Mamma was still dressed. She had got up on the bed beside Papa and crouched on the bolster. She had left off crying. Every now and then she stroked his hair with tender, desperate fingers. It struck out between the white ears of the pillow-slip in a thin, pointed crest.</p>
			<p id="id02366">Papa’s hair. His poor hair. These alterations of the familiar person, the blood-red flush, the wet, clinging beard, the pointed hair, stirred in her a rising hysteria of pity.</p>
			<p id="id02367">Mamma had given him the mustard and water. She could see the dregs in the tumbler on the night-table, and the brown hen’s feather they had tickled his throat with.</p>
			<p id="id02368">They oughtn’t to have done it. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Dr.</abbr> Charles would not have let them do it if he had been there. They should have waited. They might have known the choking and the retching would kill him. Catty ought to have known. Somewhere behind his eyes his life was leaking away through the torn net of the blood vessels, bleeding away over his brain, under his hair, under the tender, desperate fingers.</p>
			<p id="id02369">She fixed her eyes on the pattern of the wall-paper. A purplish rose-bud in a white oval on a lavender ground. She clung to it as to some firm, safe centre of being.</p>
			<h4 id="id02370" style="margin-top: 2em">VII.</h4>
			<p id="id02371">The first day. The first evening.</p>
			<p id="id02372">She went on hushed feet down the passage to let Dan in. The squeak of the latch picked at her taut nerves.</p>
			<p id="id02373">She was glad of the cold air that rushed into the shut-up, soundless house, the sweet, cold air that hung about Dan’s face and tingled in the curling frieze of his overcoat.</p>
			<p id="id02374">She took him into the lighted dining-room where Roddy and Mamma waited for him. The callous fire crackled and spurted brightness. The table was set for Dan’s supper.</p>
			<p id="id02375">Dan knew that Papa was dead. He betrayed his knowledge by the cramped stare of his heavy, gentle eyes and by the shamed, furtive movements of his hands towards the fire. But that was all. His senses were still uncontaminated by <em>their</em> knowledge. He had not seen Papa. He had not heard him.</p>
			<p id="id02376">“What was it?”</p>
			<p id="id02377">“Apoplexy.”</p>
			<p id="id02378">His eyes widened. Innocent, vague eyes that didn’t see.</p>
			<p id="id02379">Their minds fastened on Dan, to get immunity for themselves out of his unconsciousness. As long as they could keep him downstairs, in his innocence, their misery receded from them a little way.</p>
			<p id="id02380">But Mamma would not have it so. She looked at Dan. Her eyes were dull and had no more thought in them. Her mouth quivered. They knew that she was going to say something. Their thread of safety tightened. In another minute it would snap.</p>
			<p id="id02381">“Would you like to see him?” she said.</p>
			<p id="id02382">They waited for Dan to come down from the room. He would not be the same Dan. He would have seen the white sheet raised by the high mound of the body and by the stiff, upturned feet, and he would have lifted the handkerchief from the face. He would be like them, and his consciousness would put a sharper edge on theirs. He would be afraid to look at them, as they were afraid to look at each other, because of what he had seen.</p>
			<h4 id="id02383" style="margin-top: 2em">VIII.</h4>
			<p id="id02384">She lay beside her mother in the strange spare room.</p>
			<p id="id02385">She had got into bed straight from her undressing. On the other side of the mattress she had seen her mother’s kneeling body like a dwarfed thing trailed there from the floor, and her hands propped up on the edge of the eiderdown, ivory-white against the red and yellow pattern, and her darling bird’s head bowed to her finger-tips.</p>
			<p id="id02386">The wet eyelids had lifted and the drowned eyes had come to life again in a brief glance of horror. Mamma had expected her to kneel down and pray. In bed they had turned their backs on each other, and she had the feeling that her mother shrank from her as from somebody unclean who had omitted to wash herself with prayer. She wanted to take her mother in her arms and hold her tight. But she couldn’t. She couldn’t.</p>
			<p id="id02387">Suddenly her throat began to jerk with a hysterical spasm. She thought:<br/>
			“I wish I had died instead of Papa.”<br/></p>
			<p id="id02388">She forced back the jerk of her hysteria and lay still, listening to her mother’s sad, obstructed breathing and her soft, secret blowing of her nose.</p>
			<p id="id02389">Presently these sounds became a meaningless rhythm and ceased. She was a child, dreaming. She stood on the nursery staircase at Five Elms; the coffin came round the turn and crushed her against the banisters; only this time she was not afraid of it; she made herself wake because of something that would happen next. The flagstones of the passage were hard and cold to her naked feet; that was how you could tell you were awake. The door of the Morfe drawing-room opened into Mamma’s old bedroom at Five Elms, and when she came to the foot of the bed she saw her father standing there. He looked at her with a mocking, ironic animosity, so that she knew he was alive. She thought:</p>
			<p id="id02390">“It’s all right. I only dreamed he was dead. I shall tell Mamma.”</p>
			<p id="id02391">When she really woke, two entities, two different and discordant memories, came together with a shock.</p>
			<p id="id02392">Her mother was up and dressed. She leaned over her, tucking the blankets round her shoulders and saying, “Lie still and go to sleep again, there’s a good girl.”</p>
			<p id="id02393">Her memory cleared and settled, filtering, as the light filtered through the drawn blinds. Mamma and she had slept together because Papa was dead.</p>
			<h4 id="id02394" style="margin-top: 2em">IX.</h4>
			<p id="id02395">“Mary, do you know why you’re crying?”</p>
			<p id="id02396">Roddy’s face was fixed in a look of anger and resentment, and of anxiety as if he were afraid that at any minute he would be asked to do something that he couldn’t do.</p>
			<p id="id02397">They had come down together from the locked room, and gone into the drawing-room where the yellow blinds let in the same repulsive, greyish, ochreish light.</p>
			<p id="id02398">Her tears did not fall. They covered her eyes each with a shaking lens; the chairs and tables floated up to her as if she stood in an aquarium of thick, greyish, ochreish light.</p>
			<p id="id02399">“You think it’s because you care,” he said. “But it’s because you don’t care.⁠ ⁠… You’re not as bad as I am. I don’t care a bit.”</p>
			<p id="id02400">“Yes, you do, or you wouldn’t think you didn’t.”</p>
			<p id="id02401">“No. None of us really cares. Except Mamma. And even she doesn’t as much as she thinks she does. If we cared we’d be glad to sit in there, doing nothing, thinking about him.⁠ ⁠… That’s why we keep on going upstairs to look at him, to make ourselves feel as if we cared.”</p>
			<p id="id02402">She wondered. Was that really why they did it? She thought it was because they couldn’t bear to leave him there, four days and four nights, alone. She said so. But Roddy went on in his hard, flat voice, beating out his truth.</p>
			<p id="id02403">“We never did anything to make him happy.”</p>
			<p id="id02404">“He <em>was</em> happy,” she said. “When Mark went. He had Mamma.”</p>
			<p id="id02405">“Yes, but he must have known about us. He must have known about us all the time.”</p>
			<p id="id02406">“What did he know about us?”</p>
			<p id="id02407">“That we didn’t care.</p>
			<p id="id02408">“Don’t you remember,” he said, “the things we used to say about him?”</p>
			<p id="id02409">She remembered. She could see Dan in the nursery at Five Elms, scowling and swearing he would kill Papa. She could see Roddy, and Mark with his red tight face, laughing at him. She could see herself, a baby, kicking and screaming when he took her in his arms. For months she hadn’t thought about him except to wish he wasn’t there so that she could go on playing. When he was in the fit she had been playing on the Kendals’ piano, conceited and happy, not caring.</p>
			<p id="id02410">Supposing all the time, deep down, in his secret mysterious life, <em>he</em> had cared?</p>
			<p id="id02411">“We must leave off thinking about him,” Roddy said. “If we keep on thinking we shall go off our heads.”</p>
			<p id="id02412">“We <em>are</em> off our heads,” she said.</p>
			<p id="id02413">Their hatred of themselves was a biting, aching madness. She hated the conceited, happy self that hadn’t cared. The piano, gleaming sombrely in the hushed light, reminded her of it.</p>
			<p id="id02414">She hated the piano.</p>
			<p id="id02415">They dragged themselves back into the dining-room where Mamma and Dan sat doing nothing, hiding their faces from each other. The afternoon went on. Utter callousness, utter weariness came over them.</p>
			<p id="id02416">Their mother kept looking at the clock. “Uncle Victor will have got to Durlingham,” she said. An hour ago she had said, “Uncle Victor will have got to York.” Their minds clung to Uncle Victor as they had clung, four days ago, to Dan, because of his unconsciousness.</p>
			<h4 id="id02417" style="margin-top: 2em">X.</h4>
			<p id="id02418">Uncle Victor had put his arm on her shoulder. He was leaning rather heavily.</p>
			<p id="id02419">He saw what she saw: the immense coffin set up on trestles at the foot of the bed; the sheeted body packed tight in the padded white lining, the hands, curling a little, smooth and stiff, the hands of a wax figure; the firm, sallowish white face; the brown stains, like iodine, about the nostrils; the pale under lip pushed out, proudly.</p>
			<p id="id02420">A cold, thick smell, like earth damped with stagnant water, came up to them, mixed with the sharp, piercing smell of the coffin. The vigilant, upright coffin-lid leaned with its sloping shoulders against the chimney-piece, ready.</p>
			<p id="id02421">In spite of his heavy hand she was aware that Uncle Victor’s consciousness of these things was different from hers. He did not appear to be in the least sorry for Papa. On his face, wistful, absorbed, there was a faint, incongruous smile. He might have been watching a child playing some mysterious game.</p>
			<p id="id02422">He sighed. His eyes turned from the coffin to the coffin-lid. He stared at the black letters on the shining brass plate.</p>
			<p id="id02423">Emilius Olivier.<br/>
			 Born November 13th, 1827.<br/>
			 Died January 2nd, 1881.<br/></p>
			<p id="id02424">The grip on her shoulder tightened.</p>
			<p id="id02425">“He was faithful, Mary.”</p>
			<p id="id02426">He said it as if he were telling her something she couldn’t possibly have known.</p>
			<h4 id="id02427" style="margin-top: 2em">XI.</h4>
			<p id="id02428">The funeral woke her. A line of light slid through the chink of the door, crooked itself and staggered across the ceiling, a blond triangle throwing the shadows askew. That was Catty, carrying the lamp for the bearers.</p>
			<p id="id02429">It came again. There was a shuffling of feet in the passage, a secret muttering at the head of the stairs, the crack of a banister, a thud as the shoulder of the coffin butted against the wall at the turn. Then the grinding scream of the brakes on the hill, the long “Shr-issh” of the checked wheels ploughing through the snow.</p>
			<p id="id02430">She could see her mother’s face on the pillow, glimmering, with shut eyes. At each sound she could hear her draw a shaking, sobbing breath. She turned to her and took her in her arms. The small, stiff body yielded to her, helpless, like a child’s.</p>
			<p id="id02431">“Oh Mary, what shall I do? To send him away like that⁠—in a train⁠—all the way.⁠ ⁠… Your Grandmamma Olivier tried to keep him from me, and now he’s gone back to her.”</p>
			<p id="id02432">“You’ve got Mark.”</p>
			<p id="id02433">“What’s that you say?”</p>
			<p id="id02434">“Mark. Mark. Nobody can keep Mark from you. He’ll never want anybody but you. He said so.”</p>
			<p id="id02435">How small she was. You could feel her little shoulder-blades, weak and fine under your fingers, like a child’s; you could break them. To be happy with her either you or she had to be broken, to be helpless and little like a child. It was a sort of happiness to lie there, holding her, hiding her from the dreadful funeral dawn.</p>
			<p id="id02436">Five o’clock.</p>
			<p id="id02437">The funeral would last till three, going along the road to Reyburn Station, going in the train from Reyburn to Durlingham, from Durlingham to King’s Cross. She wondered whether Dan and Roddy would keep on feeling the funeral all the time. The train was part of it. Not the worst part. Not so bad as going through the East End to the City of London Cemetery.</p>
			<p id="id02438">When it came to the City of London Cemetery her mind stopped with a jerk and refused to follow the funeral any further.</p>
			<p id="id02439">Ten o’clock. Eleven.</p>
			<p id="id02440">They had shut themselves up in the dining-room, in the yellow-ochreish light. Mamma sat in her arm-chair, tired and patient, holding her Bible and her Church Service on her knees, ready. Every now and then she dozed. When this happened Mary took the Bible from her and read where it opened: “And he made the candlestick of pure gold: of beaten work made he the candlestick; his shaft, and his branch, his bowls, his knops, and his flowers, were of the same.⁠ ⁠… And in the candlestick were four bowls made like almonds, his knops and his flowers: And a knop under two branches of the same, and a knop under two branches of the same, and a knop under two branches of the same, according to the six branches going out of it. Their knops and their branches were of the same: all of it was one beaten work of pure gold.”</p>
			<p id="id02441">At two o’clock the bell of Renton Church began to toll. Her mother sat up in a stiff, self-conscious attitude and opened the Church Service. The bell went on tolling. For Papa.</p>
			<p id="id02442">It stopped. Her mother was saying something.</p>
			<p id="id02443">“Mary⁠—I can’t see with the blind down. Do you think you could read it to me?”</p>
			<p id="id02444">* * * * *</p>
			<p id="id02445">“ ‘I am the Resurrection and the Life⁠—’ ”</p>
			<p id="id02446">A queer, jarring voice burst out violently in the dark quiet of the room.<br/>
			It carried each sentence with a rush, making itself steady and hard.<br/></p>
			<p id="id02447">“ ’⁠ ⁠… He that believeth in me, though he were dead, yet shall he live.⁠ ⁠…</p>
			<p id="id02448">“ ‘I said, I will take heed to my ways: that I offend not with my tongue⁠—’ ”</p>
			<p id="id02449">“Not that one,” her mother said.</p>
			<p id="id02450">“ ‘O Lord, Thou hast been our refuge; from one generation to another.</p>
			<p id="id02451">“ ‘Before the mountains were brought forth, or ever the earth and the world were made⁠—’ ”</p>
			<p id="id02452">(Too fast. Much too fast. You were supposed to be following <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Propart; but if you kept up that pace you would have finished the Service before he had got through the Psalm.)</p>
			<p id="id02453">“ ‘Lord God most holy⁠—’ ”</p>
			<p id="id02454">“I can’t <em>hear</em> you, Mary.”</p>
			<p id="id02455">“I’m sorry. ‘O Lord most mighty, O holy and most merciful Saviour, deliver us not into the bitter pains of eternal death.</p>
			<p id="id02456">“ ‘Thou knowest, Lord, the secrets of our hearts: shut not Thy merciful ears to our prayers: but spare us, Lord most holy, O God most Mighty, O holy and merciful Saviour⁠—’ ”</p>
			<p id="id02457">(Prayers, abject prayers for themselves. None for him. Not one word. They were cowards, afraid for themselves, afraid of death; their funk had made them forget him. It was as if they didn’t believe that he was there. And, after all, it was <em>his</em> funeral.)</p>
			<p id="id02458">“ ‘Suffer us not, at our last hour⁠—’ ”</p>
			<p id="id02459">The hard voice staggered and dropped, picked itself and continued on a note of defiance.</p>
			<p id="id02460">“ ’⁠ ⁠… For on pains of death, to fall from Thee.⁠ ⁠…’ ”</p>
			<p id="id02461">(They would have come to the grave now, by the black pointed cypresses. There would be a long pit of yellow clay instead of the green grass and the white curb. Dan and Roddy would be standing by it.)</p>
			<p id="id02462">“ ‘Forasmuch as it hath pleased Almighty God of His mercy to take unto<br/>
			Himself the soul of our dear brother⁠—’ ”<br/></p>
			<p id="id02463">The queer, violent voice stopped.</p>
			<p id="id02464">“I can’t⁠—I can’t.”</p>
			<p id="id02465">Mamma seemed gratified by her inability to finish the Order for the<br/>
			Burial of the Dead.<br/></p>
			<h4 id="id02466" style="margin-top: 2em">XII.</h4>
			<p id="id02467">“You can say <em>that</em>, with your poor father lying in this grave⁠—”</p>
			<p id="id02468">It was the third evening after the funeral. A minute ago they were at perfect peace, and now the everlasting dispute about religion had begun again. There had been no Prayers since Papa died, because Mamma couldn’t trust herself to read them without breaking down. At the same time, it was inconceivable to her that there should be no Prayers.</p>
			<p id="id02469">“I should have thought, if you could read the Burial Service⁠—”</p>
			<p id="id02470">“I only did it because you asked me to.”</p>
			<p id="id02471">“Then you might do this because I ask you.”</p>
			<p id="id02472">“It isn’t the same thing. You haven’t got to believe in the Burial<br/>
			Service. But either you believe in Prayers or you don’t believe in them.<br/>
			If you don’t you oughtn’t to read them. You oughtn’t to be asked to read<br/>
			them.”<br/></p>
			<p id="id02473">“How are we going on, I should like to know? Supposing I was to be laid aside, are there to be no Prayers, ever, in this house because you’ve set yourself up in your silly self-conceit against the truth?”</p>
			<p id="id02474">The truth. The truth about God. As if anybody really knew it; as if it mattered; as if anything mattered except Mamma.</p>
			<p id="id02475">Yet it did matter. It mattered more than anything in the whole world, the truth about God, the truth about anything; just the truth. Papa’s death had nothing to do with it. It wasn’t fair of Mamma to talk as if it had; to bring it up against you like that.</p>
			<p id="id02476">“Let’s go to bed,” she said.</p>
			<p id="id02477">Her mother took no notice of the suggestion. She sat bolt upright in her chair; her face had lost its look of bored, weary patience; it flushed and flickered with resentment.</p>
			<p id="id02478">“I shall send for Aunt Bella,” she said.</p>
			<p id="id02479">“Why Aunt Bella?”</p>
			<p id="id02480">“Because I must have someone. Someone of my own.”</p>
			<h4 id="id02481" style="margin-top: 2em">XIII.</h4>
			<p id="id02482">It was three weeks now since the funeral.</p>
			<p id="id02483">Mamma and Aunt Bella sat in the dining-room, one on each side of the fireplace. Mamma looked strange and sunken and rather yellow in a widow’s cap and a black knitted shawl, but Aunt Bella had turned herself into a large, comfortable sheep by means of a fleece of white shawl and an ice-wool hood peaked over her cap.</p>
			<p id="id02484">There was a sweet, inky smell of black things dyed at Pullar’s. Mary picked out the white threads and pretended to listen while Aunt Bella talked to Mamma in a woolly voice about Aunt Lavvy’s friendship with the Unitarian minister, and Uncle Edward’s lumbago, and the unreasonableness of the working classes.</p>
			<p id="id02485">She thought how clever it was of Aunt Bella to be able to keep it up like that. “I couldn’t do it to save my life. As long as I live I shall never be any good to Mamma.”</p>
			<p id="id02486">The dining-room looked like <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Metcalfe, the undertaker. Funereal hypocrisy. She wondered whether Roddy would see the likeness.</p>
			<p id="id02487">She thought of Roddy’s nervous laugh when Catty brought in the first Yorkshire cakes. His eyes had stared at her steadily as he bit into his piece. They had said: “You don’t care. You don’t care. If you really cared you couldn’t eat.”</p>
			<p id="id02488">There were no more threads to pick.</p>
			<p id="id02489">She wondered whether she would be thought unfeeling if she were to take a book and read.</p>
			<p id="id02490">Aunt Bella began to talk about Roddy. Uncle Edward said Roddy ought to go away and get something to do.</p>
			<p id="id02491">If Roddy went away there would be no one. No one.</p>
			<p id="id02492">She got up suddenly and left them.</p>
			<h4 id="id02493" style="margin-top: 2em">XIV.</h4>
			<p id="id02494">The air of the drawing-room braced her like the rigour of a cold bath. Her heartache loosened and lost itself in the long shiver of chilled flesh.</p>
			<p id="id02495">The stone walls were clammy with the sweat of the thaw; they gave out a sour, sickly smell. Grey smears of damp dulled the polished lid of the piano.</p>
			<p id="id02496">They hadn’t used the drawing-room since Papa died. It was so bright, so heartlessly cheerful compared with the other rooms, you could see that Mamma would think you unfeeling if you wanted to sit in it when Papa was dead. She had told Catty not to light the fire and to keep the door shut, for fear you should be tempted to sit in it and forget.</p>
			<p id="id02497">The piano. Under the lid the keys were stiffening with the damp. The hammers were swelling, sticking together. She tried not to think of the piano.</p>
			<p id="id02498">She turned her back on it and stood by the side window that looked out on to the garden. Mamma’s garden. It mouldered between the high walls blackened by the thaw. On the grass-plot the snow had sunk to a thin crust, black-pitted. The earth was a black ooze through ulcers of grey snow.</p>
			<p id="id02499">She had a sudden terrifying sense of desolation.</p>
			<p id="id02500">Her mind clutched at this feeling and referred it to her father. It sent out towards him, wherever he might be, a convulsive emotional cry.</p>
			<p id="id02501">“You were wrong. I do care. Can’t you see that I can never be happy again? Yet, if you could come back I would be happy. I wouldn’t mind your⁠—your little funny ways.”</p>
			<p id="id02502">It wasn’t true. She <em>would</em> mind them. If he were really there he would know it wasn’t true.</p>
			<p id="id02503">She turned and looked again at the piano. She went to it. She opened the lid and sat down before it. Her fingers crept along the keyboard; they flickered over the notes of the Sonata <i xml:lang="it">Appassionata</i>, a ghostly, furtive playing, without pressure, without sound.</p>
			<p id="id02504">And she was ashamed as if the piano were tempting her to some cruel, abominable sin.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
