<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>II</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-2" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2 id="id00074" style="margin-top: 4em">II</h2>
			<h4 id="id00075" style="margin-top: 2em">I.</h4>
			<p id="id00076">White patterns on the window, sharp spikes, feathers, sprigs with furled edges, stuck flat on to the glass; white webs, crinkled like the skin of boiled milk, stretched across the corner of the pane; crisp, sticky stuff that bit your fingers.</p>
			<p id="id00077">Out of doors, black twigs thickened with a white fur; white powder sprinkled over the garden walk. The white, ruffled grass stood out stiffly and gave under your feet with a pleasant crunching. The air smelt good; you opened your mouth and drank it in gulps. It went down like cold, tingling water.</p>
			<p id="id00078">Frost.</p>
			<p id="id00079">You saw the sun for the first time, a red ball that hung by itself on the yellowish white sky. Mamma said, “Yes, of course it would fall if God wasn’t there to hold it up in his hands.”</p>
			<p id="id00080">Supposing God dropped the sun⁠—</p>
			<h4 id="id00081" style="margin-top: 2em">II.</h4>
			<p id="id00082">The yellowish white sky had come close up to the house, a dirty blanket let down outside the window. The tree made a black pattern on it. Clear glass beads hung in a row from the black branch, each black twig was tipped with a glass bead. When Jenny opened the window there was a queer cold smell like the smell of the black water in the butt.</p>
			<p id="id00083">Thin white powder fluttered out of the blanket and fell. A thick powder. A white fluff that piled itself in a ridge on the windowsill and curved softly in the corner of the sash. It was cold, and melted on your tongue with a taste of windowpane.</p>
			<p id="id00084">In the garden Mark and Dank and Roddy were making the snow man.</p>
			<p id="id00085">Mamma stood at the nursery window with her back to the room. She called to Mary to come and look at the snow man.</p>
			<p id="id00086">Mary was tired of the snow man. She was making a tower with Roddy’s bricks while Roddy wasn’t there. She had to build it quick before he could come back and take his bricks away, and the quicker you built it the sooner it fell down. Mamma was not to look until it was finished.</p>
			<p id="id00087">“Look⁠—look, Mamma! M‑m‑mary’s m‑m‑made a tar. And it’s <em>not</em> falled down!”</p>
			<p id="id00088">The tower reached above Jenny’s knee.</p>
			<p id="id00089">“Come and look, Mamma⁠—” But Mamma wouldn’t even turn her head.</p>
			<p id="id00090">“I’m looking at the snow man,” she said.</p>
			<p id="id00091">Something swelled up, hot and tight, in Mary’s body and in her face. She had a big bursting face and a big bursting body. She struck the tower, and it fell down. Her violence made her feel light and small again and happy.</p>
			<p id="id00092">“Where’s the tower, Mary?” said Mamma.</p>
			<p id="id00093">“There isn’t any tar. I’ve knocked it down. It was a nashty tar.”</p>
			<h4 id="id00094" style="margin-top: 2em">III.</h4>
			<p id="id00095">Aunt Charlotte⁠—</p>
			<p id="id00096">Aunt Charlotte had sent the Isle of Skye terrier to Dank.</p>
			<p id="id00097">There was a picture of Aunt Charlotte in Mamma’s Album. She stood on a strip of carpet, supported by the hoops of her crinoline; her black lace shawl made a pattern on the light gown. She wore a little hat with a white sweeping feather, and under the hat two long black curls hung down straight on each shoulder.</p>
			<p id="id00098">The other people in the Album were sulky, and wouldn’t look at you. The gentlemen made cross faces at somebody who wasn’t there; the ladies hung their heads and looked down at their crinolines. Aunt Charlotte hung her head too, but her eyes, tilted up straight under her forehead, pointed at you. And between her stiff black curls she was smiling⁠—smiling. When Mamma came to Aunt Charlotte’s picture she tried to turn over the page of the Album quick.</p>
			<p id="id00099">Aunt Charlotte sent things. She sent the fat valentine with the lace paper border and black letters printed on sweet-smelling white satin that Papa threw into the fire, and the white china doll with black hair and blue eyes and no clothes on that Jenny hid in the nursery cupboard.</p>
			<p id="id00100">The Skye terrier brought a message tied under his chin: “Tib. For my dear little nephew Dan with Aunt Charlotte’s fond love.” He had high-peaked, tufted ears and a blackish grey coat that trailed on the floor like a shawl that was too big for him. When you tried to stroke him the shawl swept and trailed away under the table. You saw nothing but shawl and ears until Papa began to tease Tib. Papa snapped his finger and thumb at him, and Tib showed little angry eyes and white teeth set in a black snarl.</p>
			<p id="id00101">Mamma said, “Please don’t do that again, Emilius.”</p>
			<p id="id00102">And Papa did it again.</p>
			<h4 id="id00103" style="margin-top: 2em">IV.</h4>
			<p id="id00104">“What are you looking at, Master Daniel?” said Jenny.</p>
			<p id="id00105">“Nothing.”</p>
			<p id="id00106">“Then what are you looking like that for? You didn’t ought to.”</p>
			<p id="id00107">Papa had sent Mark and Dank to the nursery in disgrace. Mark leaned over the back of Jenny’s chair and rocked her. His face was red but tight; and as he rocked he smiled because of his punishment.</p>
			<p id="id00108">Dank lay on the floor on his stomach, his shoulders hunched, raised on his elbows, his chin supported by his clenched fists. He was a dark and white boy with dusty eyelashes and rough, doggy hair. He had puckered up his mouth and made it small; under the scowl of his twisted eyebrows he was looking at nothing.</p>
			<p id="id00109">“It’s no worse for you than it is for Master Mark,” said Jenny.</p>
			<p id="id00110">“<em>Isn’t</em> it? Tib was my dog. If he hadn’t been my dog Papa wouldn’t have teased him, and Mamma wouldn’t have sent him back to Aunt Charlotte, and Aunt Charlotte wouldn’t have let him be run over.”</p>
			<p id="id00111">“Yes. But what did you say to your Papa?”</p>
			<p id="id00112">“I said I wish Tib <em>had</em> bitten him. So I do. And Mark said it would have served him jolly well right.”</p>
			<p id="id00113">“So it would,” said Mark.</p>
			<p id="id00114">Roddy had turned his back on them. Nobody was taking any notice of him; so he sang aloud to himself the song he was forbidden to sing:</p>
			<p id="id00115">“John Brown’s body lies a-rotting in his grave,<br/>
			 John Brown’s body lies a-rotting in his grave⁠—”<br/></p>
			<p id="id00116">The song seemed to burst out of Roddy’s beautiful white face; his pink lips twirled and tilted; his golden curls bobbed and nodded to the tune.</p>
			<p id="id00117">“John Brown’s body lies a-rotting in his grave,<br/>
			 As we go marching on!”<br/></p>
			<p id="id00118">“When I grow up,” said Dank, “I’ll kill Papa for killing Tibby. I’ll bore holes in his face with Mark’s gimlet. I’ll cut pieces out of him. I’ll get the matches and set fire to his beard. I’ll⁠—I’ll <em>hurt</em> him.”</p>
			<p id="id00119">“I don’t think <em>I</em> shall,” said Mark. “But if I do I shan’t kick up a silly row about it first.”</p>
			<p id="id00120">“It’s all very well for you. You’d kick up a row if Tibby was your dog.”</p>
			<p id="id00121">Mary had forgotten Tibby. Now she remembered.</p>
			<p id="id00122">“Where’s Tibby? I want him.”</p>
			<p id="id00123">“Tibby’s dead,” said Jenny.</p>
			<p id="id00124">“What’s ‘dead’?”</p>
			<p id="id00125">“Never you mind.”</p>
			<p id="id00126">Roddy was singing:</p>
			<p id="id00127">“ ‘And <em>from</em> his nose and <em>to</em> his chin<br/>
			 The worms crawled out and the worms crawled in’⁠—<br/></p>
			<p id="id00128">“<em>That’s</em> dead,” said Roddy.</p>
			<h4 id="id00129" style="margin-top: 2em">V.</h4>
			<p id="id00130">You never knew when Aunt Charlotte mightn’t send something. She forgot your birthday and sometimes Christmas; but, to make up for that, she remembered in between. Every time she was going to be married she remembered.</p>
			<p id="id00131">Sarah the cat came too long after Mark’s twelfth birthday to be his birthday present. There was no message with her except that Aunt Charlotte was going to be married and didn’t want her any more. Whenever Aunt Charlotte was going to be married she sent you something she didn’t want.</p>
			<p id="id00132">Sarah was a white cat with a pink nose and pink lips and pink pads under her paws. Her tabby hood came down in a peak between her green eyes. Her tabby cape went on along the back of her tail, tapering to the tip. Sarah crouched against the fireguard, her haunches raised, her head sunk back on her shoulders, and her paws tucked in under her white, pouting breast.</p>
			<p id="id00133">Mark stooped over her; his mouth smiled its small, firm smile; his eyes shone as he stroked her. Sarah raised her haunches under the caressing hand.</p>
			<p id="id00134">Mary’s body was still. Something stirred and tightened in it when she looked at Sarah.</p>
			<p id="id00135">“I want Sarah,” she said.</p>
			<p id="id00136">“You can’t have her,” said Jenny. “She’s Master Mark’s cat.”</p>
			<p id="id00137">She wanted her more than Roddy’s bricks and Dank’s animal book or Mark’s soldiers. She trembled when she held her in her arms and kissed her and smelt the warm, sweet, sleepy smell that came from the top of her head.</p>
			<p id="id00138">“Little girls can’t have everything they want,” said Jenny.</p>
			<p id="id00139">“I wanted her before you did,” said Dank. “You’re too little to have a cat at all.”</p>
			<p id="id00140">He sat on the table swinging his legs. His dark, mournful eyes watched<br/>
			Mark under their doggy scowl. He looked like Tibby, the terrier that<br/>
			Mamma sent away because Papa teased him.<br/></p>
			<p id="id00141">“Sarah isn’t your cat either, Master Daniel. Your Aunt Charlotte gave her to your Mamma, and your Mamma gave her to Master Mark.”</p>
			<p id="id00142">“She ought to have given her to me. She took my dog away.”</p>
			<p id="id00143">“<em>I</em> gave her to you,” said Mark.</p>
			<p id="id00144">“And I gave her to you back again.”</p>
			<p id="id00145">“Well then, she’s half our cat.”</p>
			<p id="id00146">“I want her,” said Mary. She said it again and again.</p>
			<p id="id00147">Mamma came and took her into the room with the big bed.</p>
			<p id="id00148">The gas blazed in the white globes. Lovely white lights washed like water over the polished yellow furniture: the bed, the great high wardrobe, the chests of drawers, the twisted poles of the looking-glass. There were soft rounds and edges of blond light on the white marble chimneypiece and the white marble washstand. The drawn curtains were covered with shining silver patterns on a sleek green ground that shone. All these things showed again in the long, flashing mirrors.</p>
			<p id="id00149">Mary looked round the room and wondered why the squat grey men had gone out of the curtains.</p>
			<p id="id00150">“Don’t look about you,” said Mamma. “Look at me. Why do you want<br/>
			Sarah?”<br/></p>
			<p id="id00151">She had forgotten Sarah.</p>
			<p id="id00152">“Because,” she said, “Sarah is so sweet.”</p>
			<p id="id00153">“Mamma gave Sarah to Mark. Mary mustn’t want what isn’t given her. Mark doesn’t say, ‘I want Mary’s dollies.’ Papa doesn’t say, ‘I want Mamma’s workbox.’ ”</p>
			<p id="id00154">“But <em>I</em> want Sarah.”</p>
			<p id="id00155">“And that’s selfish and self-willed.”</p>
			<p id="id00156">Mamma sat down on the low chair at the foot of the bed.</p>
			<p id="id00157">“God,” she said, “hates selfishness and self-will. God is grieved every time Mary is self-willed and selfish. He wants her to give up her will.”</p>
			<p id="id00158">When Mamma talked about God she took you on her lap and you played with the gold tassel on her watch chain. Her face was solemn and tender. She spoke softly. She was afraid that God might hear her talking about him and wouldn’t like it.</p>
			<p id="id00159">Mary knelt in Mamma’s lap and said “Gentle Jesus, meek and mild,” and “Our Father,” and played with the gold tassel. Every day began and ended with “Our Father” and “Gentle Jesus, meek and mild.”</p>
			<p id="id00160">“What’s hallowed?”</p>
			<p id="id00161">“Holy,” said Mamma. “What God is. Sacred and holy.”</p>
			<p id="id00162">Mary twisted the gold tassel and made it dance and run through the loop of the chain. Mamma took it out of her hands and pressed them together and stooped her head to them and kissed them. She could feel the kiss tingling through her body from her fingertips, and she was suddenly docile and appeased.</p>
			<p id="id00163">When she lay in her cot behind the curtain she prayed: “Please God keep me from wanting Sarah.”</p>
			<p id="id00164">In the morning she remembered. When she looked at Sarah she thought:<br/>
			“Sarah is Mark’s cat and Dank’s cat.”<br/></p>
			<p id="id00165">She touched her with the tips of her fingers. Sarah’s eyes were reproachful and unhappy. She ran away and crept under the chest of drawers.</p>
			<p id="id00166">“Mamma gave Sarah to Mark.”</p>
			<p id="id00167">Mamma was sacred and holy. Mark was sacred and holy. Sarah was sacred and holy, crouching under the chest of drawers with her eyes gleaming in the darkness.</p>
			<h4 id="id00168" style="margin-top: 2em">VI.</h4>
			<p id="id00169">It was a good and happy day.</p>
			<p id="id00170">She lay on the big bed. Her head rested on Mamma’s arm. Mamma’s face was close to her. Water trickled into her eyes out of the wet pad of pocket-handkerchief. Under the cold pad a hot, grinding pain came from the hole in her forehead. Jenny stood beside the bed. Her face had waked up and she was busy squeezing something out of a red sponge into a basin of pink water.</p>
			<p id="id00171">When Mamma pressed the pocket-handkerchief tight the pain ground harder, when she loosened it blood ran out of the hole and the pocket-handkerchief was warm again. Then Jenny put on the sponge.</p>
			<p id="id00172">She could hear Jenny say, “It was the Master’s fault. She didn’t ought to have been left in the room with him.”</p>
			<p id="id00173">She remembered. The dining-room and the sharp spike on the fender and Papa’s legs stretched out. He had told her not to run so fast and she had run faster and faster. It wasn’t Papa’s fault.</p>
			<p id="id00174">She remembered tripping over Papa’s legs. Then falling on the spike.<br/>
			Then nothing.<br/></p>
			<p id="id00175">Then waking in Mamma’s room.</p>
			<p id="id00176">She wasn’t crying. The pain made her feel good and happy; and Mamma was calling her her darling and her little lamb. Mamma loved her. Jenny loved her.</p>
			<p id="id00177">Mark and Dank and Roddy came in. Mark carried Sarah in his arms. They stood by the bed and looked at her; their faces pressed close. Roddy had been crying; but Mark and Dank were excited. They climbed on to the bed and kissed her. They made Sarah crouch down close beside her and held her there. They spoke very fast, one after the other.</p>
			<p id="id00178">“We’ve brought you Sarah.”</p>
			<p id="id00179">“We’ve given you Sarah.”</p>
			<p id="id00180">“She’s your cat.”</p>
			<p id="id00181">“To keep forever.”</p>
			<p id="id00182">She was glad that she had tripped over Papa’s legs. It was a good and happy day.</p>
			<h4 id="id00183" style="margin-top: 2em">VII.</h4>
			<p id="id00184">The sun shone. The polished green blades of the grass glittered. The gravel walk and the nasturtium bed together made a broad orange blaze. Specks like glass sparkled in the hot grey earth. On the grey flagstone the red poppy you picked yesterday was a black thread, a purple stain.</p>
			<p id="id00185">She was happy sitting on the grass, drawing the fine, sharp blades between her fingers, sniffing the smell of the mignonette that tingled like sweet pepper, opening and shutting the yellow mouths of the snapdragon.</p>
			<p id="id00186">The garden flowers stood still, straight up in the grey earth. They were as tall as you were. You could look at them a long time without being tired.</p>
			<p id="id00187">The garden flowers were not like the animals. The cat Sarah bumped her sleek head under your chin; you could feel her purr throbbing under her ribs and crackling in her throat. The white rabbit pushed out his nose to you and drew it in again, quivering, and breathed his sweet breath into your mouth.</p>
			<p id="id00188">The garden flowers wouldn’t let you love them. They stood still in their beauty, quiet, arrogant, reproachful. They put you in the wrong. When you stroked them they shook and swayed from you; when you held them tight their heads dropped, their backs broke, they shrivelled up in your hands. All the flowers in the garden were Mamma’s; they were sacred and holy.</p>
			<p id="id00189">You loved best the flowers that you stooped down to look at and the flowers that were not Mamma’s: the small crumpled poppy by the edge of the field, and the ears of the wild rye that ran up your sleeve and tickled you, and the speedwell, striped like the blue eyes of Meta, the wax doll.</p>
			<p id="id00190">When you smelt mignonette you thought of Mamma.</p>
			<p id="id00191">It was her birthday. Mark had given her a little sumach tree in a red pot. They took it out of the pot and dug a hole by the front door steps outside the pantry window and planted it there.</p>
			<p id="id00192">Papa came out on to the steps and watched them.</p>
			<p id="id00193">“I suppose,” he said, “you think it’ll <em>grow</em>?”</p>
			<p id="id00194">Mamma never turned to look at him. She smiled because it was her birthday. She said, “Of course it’ll grow.”</p>
			<p id="id00195">She spread out its roots and pressed it down and padded up the earth about it with her hands. It held out its tiny branches, stiffly, like a toy tree, standing no higher than the mignonette. Papa looked at Mamma and Mark, busy and happy with their heads together, taking no notice of him. He laughed out of his big beard and went back into the house suddenly and slammed the door. You knew that he disliked the sumach tree and that he was angry with Mark for giving it to Mamma.</p>
			<p id="id00196">When you smelt mignonette you thought of Mamma and Mark and the sumach tree, and Papa standing on the steps, and the queer laugh that came out of his beard.</p>
			<p id="id00197">When it rained you were naughty and unhappy because you couldn’t go out of doors. Then Mamma stood at the window and looked into the front garden. She smiled at the rain. She said, “It will be good for my sumach tree.”</p>
			<p id="id00198">Every day you went out on to the steps to see if the sumach tree had grown.</p>
			<h4 id="id00199" style="margin-top: 2em">VIII.</h4>
			<p id="id00200">The white lamb stood on the table beside her cot.</p>
			<p id="id00201">Mamma put it there every night so that she could see it first thing in the morning when she woke.</p>
			<p id="id00202">She had had a birthday. Suddenly in the middle of the night she was five years old.</p>
			<p id="id00203">She had kept on waking up with the excitement of it. Then, in the dark twilight of the room, she had seen a bulky thing inside the cot, leaning up against the rail. It stuck out queerly and its weight dragged the counterpane tight over her feet.</p>
			<p id="id00204">The birthday present. What she saw was not its real shape. When she poked it, stiff paper bent in and crackled; and she could feel something big and solid underneath. She lay quiet and happy, trying to guess what it could be, and fell asleep again.</p>
			<p id="id00205">It was the white lamb. It stood on a green stand. It smelt of dried hay and gum and paint like the other toy animals, but its white coat had a dull, woolly smell, and that was the real smell of the lamb. Its large, slanting eyes stared off over its ears into the far corners of the room, so that it never looked at you. This made her feel sometimes that the lamb didn’t love her, and sometimes that it was frightened and wanted to be comforted.</p>
			<p id="id00206">She trembled when first she stroked it and held it to her face, and sniffed its lamby smell.</p>
			<p id="id00207">Papa looked down at her. He was smiling; and when she looked up at him she was not afraid. She had the same feeling that came sometimes when she sat in Mamma’s lap and Mamma talked about God and Jesus. Papa was sacred and holy.</p>
			<p id="id00208">He had given her the lamb.</p>
			<p id="id00209">It was the end of her birthday; Mamma and Jenny were putting her to bed. She felt weak and tired, and sad because it was all over.</p>
			<p id="id00210">“Come to that,” said Jenny, “your birthday was over at five minutes past twelve this morning.”</p>
			<p id="id00211">“When will it come again?”</p>
			<p id="id00212">“Not for a whole year,” said Mamma.</p>
			<p id="id00213">“I wish it would come tomorrow.”</p>
			<p id="id00214">Mamma shook her head at her. “You want to be spoiled and petted every day.”</p>
			<p id="id00215">“No. No. I want⁠—I want⁠—”</p>
			<p id="id00216">“She doesn’t know what she wants,” said Jenny.</p>
			<p id="id00217">“Yes. I do. I <em>do</em>.”</p>
			<p id="id00218">“Well⁠—”</p>
			<p id="id00219">“I want to love Papa every day. ’Cause he gave me my lamb.”</p>
			<p id="id00220">“Oh,” said Mamma, “if you only love people because they give you birthday presents⁠—”</p>
			<p id="id00221">“But I don’t⁠—I don’t⁠—really and truly⁠—”</p>
			<p id="id00222">“You didn’t ought to have no more birthdays,” said Jenny, “if they make you cry.”</p>
			<p id="id00223">Why couldn’t they see that crying meant that she wanted Papa to be sacred and holy every day?</p>
			<p id="id00224">The day after the birthday when Papa went about the same as ever, looking big and frightening, when he “Baa’d” into her face and called out, “Mary had a little lamb!” and “Mary, Mary, quite contrary,” she looked after him sorrowfully and thought: “Papa gave me my lamb.”</p>
			<h4 id="id00225" style="margin-top: 2em">IX.</h4>
			<p id="id00226">One day Uncle Edward and Aunt Bella came over from Chadwell Grange. They were talking to Mamma a long time in the drawing-room, and when she came in they stopped and whispered.</p>
			<p id="id00227">Roddy told her the secret. Uncle Edward was going to give her a live lamb.</p>
			<p id="id00228">Mark and Dank said it couldn’t be true. Uncle Edward was not a real uncle; he was only Aunt Bella’s husband, and he never gave you anything. And anyhow the lamb wasn’t born yet and couldn’t come for weeks and weeks.</p>
			<p id="id00229">Every morning she asked, “Has my new lamb come? When is it coming? Do you think it will come today?”</p>
			<p id="id00230">She could keep on sitting still quite a long time by merely thinking about the new lamb. It would run beside her when she played in the garden. It would eat grass out of her hand. She would tie a ribbon round its neck and lead it up and down the lane. At these moments she forgot the toy lamb. It stood on the chest of drawers in the nursery, looking off into the corners of the room, neglected.</p>
			<p id="id00231">By the time Uncle Edward and Aunt Bella sent for her to come and see the lamb, she knew exactly what it would be like and what would happen. She saw it looking like the lambs in the Bible Picture Book, fat, and covered with thick, pure white wool. She saw Uncle Edward, with his yellow face and big nose and black whiskers, coming to her across the lawn at Chadwell Grange, carrying the lamb over his shoulder like Jesus.</p>
			<p id="id00232">It was a cold morning. They drove a long time in Uncle Edward’s carriage, over the hard, loud roads, between fields white with frost, and Uncle Edward was not on his lawn.</p>
			<p id="id00233">Aunt Bella stood in the big hall, waiting for them. She looked much larger and more important than Mamma.</p>
			<p id="id00234">“Aunt Bella, have you got my new lamb?”</p>
			<p id="id00235">She tried not to shriek it out, because Aunt Bella was nearly always poorly, and Mamma told her that if you shrieked at her she would be ill.</p>
			<p id="id00236">Mamma said “Sh-sh-sh!” And Aunt Bella whispered something and she heard<br/>
			Mamma answer, “Better not.”<br/></p>
			<p id="id00237">“If she <em>sees</em> it,” said Aunt Bella, “she’ll understand.”</p>
			<p id="id00238">Mamma shook her head at Aunt Bella.</p>
			<p id="id00239">“Edward would like it,” said Aunt Bella. “He wanted to give it her himself. It’s <em>his</em> present.”</p>
			<p id="id00240">Mamma took her hand and they followed Aunt Bella through the servants’<br/>
			hall into the kitchen. The servants were all there, Rose and Annie and<br/>
			Cook, and <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Fisher, the housekeeper, and Giles, the young footman.<br/>
			They all stared at her in a queer, kind way as she came in.<br/></p>
			<p id="id00241">A low screen was drawn close round one corner of the fireplace; Uncle Edward and Pidgeon, the bailiff, were doing something to it with a yellow horse-cloth.</p>
			<p id="id00242">Uncle Edward came to her, looking down the side of his big nose. He led her to the screen and drew it away.</p>
			<p id="id00243">Something lay on the floor wrapped in a piece of dirty blanket. When<br/>
			Uncle Edward pushed back the blanket a bad smell came out. He said,<br/>
			“Here’s your lamb, Mary. You’re just in time.”<br/></p>
			<p id="id00244">She saw a brownish grey animal with a queer, hammer-shaped head and long black legs. Its body was drawn out and knotted like an enormous maggot. It lay twisted to one side and its eyes were shut.</p>
			<p id="id00245">“That isn’t my lamb.”</p>
			<p id="id00246">“It’s the lamb I always said Miss Mary was to have, isn’t it, Pidgeon?”</p>
			<p id="id00247">“Yes, Squoire, it’s the lamb you bid me set asoide for little Missy.”</p>
			<p id="id00248">“Then,” said Mary, “why does it look like that?”</p>
			<p id="id00249">“It’s very ill,” Mamma said gently. “Poor Uncle Edward thought you’d like to see it before it died. You <em>are</em> glad you’ve seen it, aren’t you?”</p>
			<p id="id00250">“No.”</p>
			<p id="id00251">Just then the lamb stirred in its blanket; it opened its eyes and looked at her.</p>
			<p id="id00252">She thought: “It’s my lamb. It looked at me. It’s <em>my</em> lamb and it’s dying. My <em>lamb’s</em> dying.”</p>
			<p id="id00253">The bad smell came again out of the blanket. She tried not to think of it. She wanted to sit down on the floor beside the lamb and lift it out of its blanket and nurse it; but Mamma wouldn’t let her.</p>
			<p id="id00254">When she got home Mamma took down the toy lamb from the chest of drawers and brought it to her.</p>
			<p id="id00255">She sat quiet a long time holding it in her lap and stroking it.</p>
			<p id="id00256">The stiff eyes of the toy lamb stared away over its ears.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
