<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>XI</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-11" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2 id="id00914" style="margin-top: 4em">XI</h2>
			<h4 id="id00915" style="margin-top: 2em">I.</h4>
			<p id="id00916">Nobody has any innate ideas. Children and savages and idiots haven’t any, so grown-up people can’t have, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Locke says.</p>
			<p id="id00917">But how did he know? You might have them and forget about them, and only remember again after you were grown up.</p>
			<p id="id00918">She sat up in the drawing-room till nine o’clock now, because she was eleven years old. She had taken the doll’s clothes out of the old wooden box and filled it with books: the Bible, Milton, and Pope’s Homer, the Greek Accidence, and <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Plutarch’s Lives</i>, and the Comedies from Papa’s illustrated Shakespeare in seven volumes, which he never read, and two volumes of <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Pepys’ Diary</i>, and Locke <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">On the Human Understanding</i>. She wished the Bible had been bound in pink calf like Pepys instead of the shiny black leather that made you think of wet goloshes. Then it would have looked new and exciting like the other books.</p>
			<p id="id00919">She sat on a footstool with her box beside her in the corner behind Mamma’s chair. She had to hide there because Mamma didn’t believe you really liked reading. She thought you were only shamming and showing off. Sometimes <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> and <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Farmer would come in, and <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Farmer would play chess with Papa while <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Farmer talked to Mamma about how troublesome and independent the tradespeople were, and how hard it was to get servants and to keep them. Mamma listened to <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Farmer as if she were saying something wonderful and exciting. Sometimes it would be the Proparts; or <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Batty would come in alone. And sometimes they would all come together with the aunts and uncles, and there would be a party.</p>
			<p id="id00920">Mary always hoped that Uncle Victor would notice her and say, “Mary is reading Locke <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">On the Human Understanding</i>,” or that <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Propart would come and turn over the books and make some interesting remark. But they never did.</p>
			<p id="id00921">At half-past eight Catty would bring in the tea-tray; the white and grey and gold teacups would be set out round the bulging silver teapot that lifted up its spout with a foolish, pompous expression, like a hen. Mamma would move about the table in her mauve silk gown, and there would be a scent of cream and strong tea. Every now and then the shimmering silk and the rich scent would come between her and the grey, tight-pressed, difficult page.</p>
			<p id="id00922">“ ‘The senses at first let in particular ideas and furnish the yet empty cabinet: and the mind growing by degrees familiar with some of them, they are lodged in the memory and names got to them.’</p>
			<p id="id00923">“Then how⁠—Then how?⁠—”</p>
			<p id="id00924">The thought she thought was coming wouldn’t come, and Mamma was telling her to get up and hand round the bread and butter.</p>
			<h4 id="id00925" style="margin-top: 2em">II.</h4>
			<p id="id00926">“<abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Ponsonby, do you remember your innate ideas?”</p>
			<p id="id00927">“My <em>how</em> much?” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Ponsonby.</p>
			<p id="id00928">“The ideas you had before you were born?”</p>
			<p id="id00929"><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Ponsonby said, “Before I was born? Well⁠—” He really seemed to be considering it.</p>
			<p id="id00930">Mamma’s chair, pushed further along the hearthrug, had driven her back and back, till the box was hidden behind the curtain.</p>
			<p id="id00931"><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Ponsonby was Mark’s friend. Mark was at the Royal Military Academy at Woolwich now. Every Saturday <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Ponsonby came home with Mark and stayed till Sunday evening. You knew that sooner or later he would find you out behind Mamma’s chair.</p>
			<p id="id00932">“I mean,” she said, “the ideas you were born with.”</p>
			<p id="id00933">“Seems to me,” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Ponsonby, “I was born with precious few. Anyhow I can’t say I remember them.”</p>
			<p id="id00934">“I was afraid you’d say that. It’s what <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Locke says.”</p>
			<p id="id00935">“<abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> how much?”</p>
			<p id="id00936">“<abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Locke. You can look at him if you like.”</p>
			<p id="id00937">She thought: “He won’t. He won’t. They never, never do.”</p>
			<p id="id00938">But <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Ponsonby did. He looked at <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Locke, and he looked at Mary, and he said, “By Gum!” He even read the bits about the baby and the empty cabinet.</p>
			<p id="id00939">“You don’t mean to say you <em>like</em> this sort of thing?”</p>
			<p id="id00940">“I like it most awfully. Of course I don’t mean as much as brook-jumping, but almost as much.”</p>
			<p id="id00941">And <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Ponsonby said, “Well⁠—I must say⁠—of <em>all</em>⁠—you <em>are</em>⁠—by Gum!”</p>
			<p id="id00942">He made it sound like the most delicious praise.</p>
			<p id="id00943"><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Ponsonby was taller and older than Mark. He was nineteen. She thought he was the nicest looking person she had ever seen.</p>
			<p id="id00944">His face was the colour of thick white honey; his hair was very dark, and he had long blue eyes and long black eyebrows like bars, drawn close down on to the blue. His nose would have been hooky if it hadn’t been so straight, and his mouth was quiet and serious. When he talked to you his mouth and eyes looked as if they liked it.</p>
			<p id="id00945">Mark came and said, “Minky, if you stodge like that you’ll get all flabby.”</p>
			<p id="id00946">It wasn’t nice of Mark to say that before <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Ponsonby, when he knew perfectly well that she could jump her own height.</p>
			<p id="id00947">“<em>Me</em> flabby? Feel my muscle.”</p>
			<p id="id00948">It rose up hard under her soft skin.</p>
			<p id="id00949">“Feel it, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Ponsonby.”</p>
			<p id="id00950">“I say⁠—<em>what</em> a biceps!”</p>
			<p id="id00951">“Yes, but,” Mark said, “you should feel his.”</p>
			<p id="id00952">His was even bigger and harder than Mark’s. “Mine,” she said sorrowfully, “will never be as good as his.”</p>
			<p id="id00953">Then Mamma came and told her it was bedtime, and <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Ponsonby said, “Oh,<br/>
			<abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Olivier, <em>not</em> yet.”<br/></p>
			<p id="id00954">“Five minutes more, then.”</p>
			<p id="id00955">But the five minutes were never any good. You just sat counting them.</p>
			<p id="id00956">And when it was all over and <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Ponsonby strode across the drawing-room and opened the door for her she went laughing; she stood in the doorway and laughed. When you were sent to bed at nine the only dignified thing was to pretend you didn’t care.</p>
			<p id="id00957">And <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Ponsonby, holding the door so that Mamma couldn’t see him, looked at her and shook his head, as much as to say, “You and I know it isn’t a joke for either of us, this unrighteous banishment.”</p>
			<h4 id="id00958" style="margin-top: 2em">III.</h4>
			<p id="id00959">“What on earth are you doing?”</p>
			<p id="id00960">She might have known that some day Mamma would come up and find her putting the children to bed.</p>
			<p id="id00961">She had seven. There was Isabel Batty, and <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Farmer’s red-haired baby, and Mark in the blue frock in the picture when he was four, and Dank in his white frock and blue sash, and the three very little babies you made up out of your head. Six o’clock was their bedtime.</p>
			<p id="id00962">“You’d no business to touch those baby-clothes,” Mamma said.</p>
			<p id="id00963">The baby-clothes were real. Every evening she took them from the drawer in the linen cupboard; and when she had sung the children to sleep she shook out the little frocks and petticoats and folded them in a neat pile at the foot of the bed.</p>
			<p id="id00964">“I thought you were in the schoolroom learning your lessons?”</p>
			<p id="id00965">“So I was, Mamma. But⁠—you know⁠—six o’clock is their bedtime.”</p>
			<p id="id00966">“Oh Mary! you told me you’d given up that silly game.”</p>
			<p id="id00967">“So I did. But they won’t let me. They don’t want me to give them up.”</p>
			<p id="id00968">Mamma sat down, as if it was too much for her.</p>
			<p id="id00969">“I hope,” she said, “you don’t talk to Catty or anybody about it.”</p>
			<p id="id00970">“No, Mamma. I couldn’t. They’re my secret.”</p>
			<p id="id00971">“That was all very well when you were a little thing. But a great girl of twelve⁠—You ought to be ashamed of yourself.”</p>
			<p id="id00972">Mamma had gone. She had taken away the baby-clothes. Mary lay face downwards on her bed.</p>
			<p id="id00973">Shame burned through her body like fire. Hot tears scalded her eyelids. She thought: “How was I to know you mustn’t have babies?” Still, she couldn’t give them all up. She <em>must</em> keep Isabel and the red-haired baby.</p>
			<p id="id00974">But what would <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Ponsonby think of her if he knew?</p>
			<h4 id="id00975" style="margin-top: 2em">IV.</h4>
			<p id="id00976">“<abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Ponsonby. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Ponsonby! Stay where you are and look!”</p>
			<p id="id00977">From the window at the end of the top corridor the side of the house went sheer down into the lane. Mary was at the window. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Ponsonby was in the lane.</p>
			<p id="id00978">She climbed on to the ledge and knelt there. Grasping the bottom of the window frame firmly with both hands and letting her knees slide from the ledge, she lowered herself, and hung for one ecstatic moment, and drew herself up again by her arms.</p>
			<p id="id00979">“What did you do it for, Mary?”</p>
			<p id="id00980"><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Ponsonby had rushed up the stairs and they were sitting there. He was so tall that he hung over her when he leaned.</p>
			<p id="id00981">“It’s nothing. You ought to be able to pull up your own weight.”</p>
			<p id="id00982">“You mustn’t do it from top-storey windows. It’s dangerous.”</p>
			<p id="id00983">“Not if you’ve practised on the banisters first. Where’s Mark?”</p>
			<p id="id00984">“With your Mater. I say, supposing you and I go for a walk.”</p>
			<p id="id00985">“We must be back at six o’clock,” she said.</p>
			<p id="id00986">When you went for walks with Mark or <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Ponsonby they always raced you down Ley Street and over the ford at the bottom. They both gave you the same start to the Horn’s Tavern; the only difference was that with <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Ponsonby you were over the ford first.</p>
			<p id="id00987">They turned at the ford into the field path that led to Drake’s Farm and the plantation. He jumped all the stiles and she vaulted them. She could see that he respected her. And so they came to the big water jump into the plantation. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Ponsonby went over first and held out his arms. She hurled herself forward and he caught her. And this time, instead of putting her down instantly, he lifted her up in his arms and held her tight and kissed her. Her heart thumped violently and she had a sudden happy feeling. Neither spoke.</p>
			<p id="id00988">Humphrey Propart had kissed her once for a forfeit. And she had boxed his ears. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Ponsonby’s was a different sort of kiss.</p>
			<p id="id00989">They tore through the plantation as if nothing had happened, clearing all the brooks in a businesslike way. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Ponsonby took brook-jumping as the serious and delightful thing it was.</p>
			<p id="id00990">Going home across the fields they held each other’s hands, like children. “Minky,” he said, “I don’t like to think of you hanging out of top-storey windows.”</p>
			<p id="id00991">“But it’s so jolly to feel your body come squirming up after your arms.”</p>
			<p id="id00992">“It is. It is. All the same, promise me you won’t do it any more.”</p>
			<p id="id00993">“Why?”</p>
			<p id="id00994">“Because I’m going to India when I’ve passed out, and I want to find you alive when I come back. Promise me, Minky.”</p>
			<p id="id00995">“I will, if you’re really going. But you’re the only person I allow to call me Minky, except Mark.”</p>
			<p id="id00996">“Am I? I’m glad I’m the only person.”</p>
			<p id="id00997">They went on.</p>
			<p id="id00998">“I’m afraid,” she said, “my hand is getting very hot and horrid.”</p>
			<p id="id00999">He held it tighter. “I don’t care how hot and horrid it gets. And I think you might call me Jimmy.”</p>
			<p id="id01000">It was long after six o’clock. She had forgotten the children and their bedtime. After that day she never played with them again.</p>
			<h4 id="id01001" style="margin-top: 2em">V.</h4>
			<p id="id01002">“If I were you,” Mamma said, “I should put away that box of books. You’ll be no use if you read⁠—read⁠—read all day long.”</p>
			<p id="id01003">“You oughtn’t to say that, Mamma. I <em>am</em> of use. You know I can make the sewing-machine go when you can’t.”</p>
			<p id="id01004">Mamma smiled. She knew it.</p>
			<p id="id01005">“And which would you rather took you over the crossing at the Bank? Me or<br/>
			Papa?”<br/></p>
			<p id="id01006">Mamma smiled again. She knew she was safer with Mary at a crossing, because Papa teased her and frightened her before he dragged her over. But Mary led her gently, holding back the noses of the horses.</p>
			<p id="id01007">“There’s that Locke on the human understanding,” said Mamma. “Poor Jimmy was frightened when he found you reading it.”</p>
			<p id="id01008">“He wasn’t. He was most awfully pleased and excited.”</p>
			<p id="id01009">“He was laughing at you.”</p>
			<p id="id01010">“He wasn’t. He wasn’t.”</p>
			<p id="id01011">“Of course he was laughing at you. What did you think he was doing?”</p>
			<p id="id01012">“I thought he was interested.”</p>
			<p id="id01013">“He wasn’t, then. Men,” Mamma said, “are <em>not</em> interested in little bookworms. He told me it was very bad for you.”</p>
			<p id="id01014">Shame again. Hot, burning and scalding shame. He was only laughing at her.</p>
			<p id="id01015">“Mark doesn’t laugh at me,” she said. The thought of Mark and of his love for her healed her wound.</p>
			<p id="id01016">“A precious deal,” Mamma said, “you know about Mark.”</p>
			<p id="id01017">Mamma was safe. Oh, she was safe. She knew that Mark loved her best.</p>
			<h4 id="id01018" style="margin-top: 2em">VI.</h4>
			<p id="id01019">On the cover of Pinnock’s Catechism there was a small black picture of the Parthenon. And under it was written:</p>
			<p id="id01020">“Abode of gods whose shrines no longer burn.”</p>
			<p id="id01021">Supposing the candles in <abbr>St.</abbr> Mary’s Chapel no longer burned?</p>
			<p id="id01022">Supposing Barkingside church and Aldborough Hatch church fell to bits and there were no more clergymen? And you only read in history books about people like <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Batty and <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Propart and their surplices and the things they wore round their necks?</p>
			<p id="id01023">Supposing the Christian religion passed away?</p>
			<p id="id01024">It excited you to think these things. But when you heard the “Magnificat” in church, or when you thought of Christ hanging so bravely on the cross you were sorry and you stopped thinking.</p>
			<p id="id01025">What a pity you couldn’t ever go on without having to stop.</p>
			<h5 id="id01026">END OF BOOK TWO</h5>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
