<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>I</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<h2 id="id00012" style="margin-top: 4em">BOOK ONE
		INFANCY (1865-1869)</h2>
		<section id="chapter-1" epub:type="chapter">
			<h3 id="id00013">I</h3>
			<section id="chapter-1-1" epub:type="subchapter">
				<h4 id="id00014">I.</h4>
				<p id="id00015">The curtain of the big bed hung down beside the cot.</p>
				<p id="id00016">When old Jenny shook it the wooden rings rattled on the pole and grey men with pointed heads and squat, bulging bodies came out of the folds on to the flat green ground. If you looked at them they turned into squab faces smeared with green.</p>
				<p id="id00017">Every night, when Jenny had gone away with the doll and the donkey, you hunched up the blanket and the stiff white counterpane to hide the curtain and you played with the knob in the green painted iron railing of the cot. It stuck out close to your face, winking and grinning at you in a friendly way. You poked it till it left off and turned grey and went back into the railing. Then you had to feel for it with your finger. It fitted the hollow of your hand, cool and hard, with a blunt nose that pushed agreeably into the palm.</p>
				<p id="id00018">In the dark you could go tip-finger along the slender, lashing flourishes of the ironwork. By stretching your arm out tight you could reach the curlykew at the end. The short, steep flourish took you to the top of the railing and on behind your head.</p>
				<p id="id00019">Tip-fingering backwards that way you got into the grey lane where the prickly stones were and the hedge of little biting trees. When the door in the hedge opened you saw the man in the nightshirt. He had only half a face. From his nose and his cheekbones downwards his beard hung straight like a dark cloth. You opened your mouth, but before you could scream you were back in the cot; the room was light; the green knob winked and grinned at you from the railing, and behind the curtain Papa and Mamma were lying in the big bed.</p>
				<p id="id00020">One night she came back out of the lane as the door in the hedge was opening. The man stood in the room by the washstand, scratching his long thigh. He was turned slantwise from the nightlight on the washstand so that it showed his yellowish skin under the lifted shirt. The white half-face hung by itself on the darkness. When he left off scratching and moved towards the cot she screamed.</p>
				<p id="id00021">Mamma took her into the big bed. She curled up there under the shelter of the raised hip and shoulder. Mamma’s face was dry and warm and smelt sweet like Jenny’s powder-puff. Mamma’s mouth moved over her wet cheeks, nipping her tears.</p>
				<p id="id00022">Her cry changed to a whimper and a soft, ebbing sob.</p>
				<p id="id00023">Mamma’s breast: a smooth, cool, round thing that hung to your hands and slipped from them when they tried to hold it. You could feel the little ridges of the stiff nipple as your finger pushed it back into the breast.</p>
				<p id="id00024">Her sobs shook in her throat and ceased suddenly.</p>
			</section>
			<section id="chapter-1-2" epub:type="subchapter">
				<h4 id="id00025">II.</h4>
				<p id="id00026">The big white globes hung in a ring above the dinner table. At first, when she came into the room, carried high in Jenny’s arms, she could see nothing but the hanging, shining globes. Each had a light inside it that made it shine.</p>
				<p id="id00027">Mamma was sitting at the far end of the table. Her face and neck shone white above the pile of oranges on the dark blue dish. She was dipping her fingers in a dark blue glass bowl.</p>
				<p id="id00028">When Mary saw her she strained towards her, leaning dangerously out of Jenny’s arms. Old Jenny said “Tchit-tchit!” and made her arms tight and hard and put her on Papa’s knee.</p>
				<p id="id00029">Papa sat up, broad and tall above the table, all by himself. He was dressed in black. One long brown beard hung down in front of him and one short beard covered his mouth. You knew he was smiling because his cheeks swelled high up his face so that his eyes were squeezed into narrow, shining slits. When they came out again you saw scarlet specks and smears in their corners.</p>
				<p id="id00030">Papa’s big white hand was on the table, holding a glass filled with some red stuff that was both dark and shining and had a queer, sharp smell.</p>
				<p id="id00031">“Porty-worty winey-piney,” said Papa.</p>
				<p id="id00032">The same queer, sharp smell came from between his two beards when he spoke.</p>
				<p id="id00033">Mark was sitting up beside Mamma a long way off. She could see them looking at each other. Roddy and Dank were with them.</p>
				<p id="id00034">They were making flowers out of orange peel and floating them in the finger bowls. Mamma’s fingers were blue and sharp-pointed in the water behind the dark blue glass of her bowl. The floating orange-peel flowers were blue. She could see Mamma smiling as she stirred them about with the tips of her blue fingers.</p>
				<p id="id00035">Her underlip pouted and shook. She didn’t want to sit by herself on<br/>
				Papa’s knee. She wanted to sit in Mamma’s lap beside Mark. She wanted<br/>
				Mark to make orange-peel flowers for her. She wanted Mamma to look<br/>
				down at her and smile.<br/></p>
				<p id="id00036">Papa was spreading butter on biscuit and powdered sugar on the butter.</p>
				<p id="id00037">“Sugary⁠—Buttery⁠—Bippery,” said Papa.</p>
				<p id="id00038">She shook her head. “I want to go to Mamma. I want to go to Mark.”</p>
				<p id="id00039">She pushed away the biscuit. “No. No. Mamma give Mary. Mark give<br/>
				Mary.”<br/></p>
				<p id="id00040">“Drinky⁠—winky,” said Papa.</p>
				<p id="id00041">He put his glass to her shaking mouth. She turned her head away, and he took it between his thumb and finger and turned it back again. Her neck moved stiffly. Her head felt small and brittle under the weight and pinch of the big hand. The smell and the sour, burning taste of the wine made her cry.</p>
				<p id="id00042">“Don’t tease Baby, Emilius,” said Mamma.</p>
				<p id="id00043">“I never tease anybody.”</p>
				<p id="id00044">He lifted her up. She could feel her body swell and tighten under the bands and drawstrings of her clothes, as she struggled and choked, straining against the immense clamp of his arms. When his wet red lips pushed out between his beards to kiss her she kicked. Her toes drummed against something stiff and thin that gave way and sprang out again with a cracking and popping sound.</p>
				<p id="id00045">He put her on the floor. She stood there all by herself, crying, till<br/>
				Mark came and took her by the hand.<br/></p>
				<p id="id00046">“Naughty Baby. Naughty Mary,” said Mamma. “Don’t kiss her, Mark.”</p>
				<p id="id00047">“No, Mamma.”</p>
				<p id="id00048">He knelt on the floor beside her and smiled into her face and wiped it with his pocket-handkerchief. She put out her mouth and kissed him and stopped crying.</p>
				<p id="id00049">“Jenny must come,” Mamma said, “and take Mary away.”</p>
				<p id="id00050">“No. Mark take Mary.”</p>
				<p id="id00051">“Let the little beast take her,” said Papa. “If he does he shan’t come back again. Do you hear that, sir?”</p>
				<p id="id00052">Mark said, “Yes, Papa.”</p>
				<p id="id00053">They went out of the room hand in hand. He carried her upstairs pickaback. As they went she rested her chin on the nape of his neck where his brown hair thinned off into shiny, golden down.</p>
			</section>
			<section id="chapter-1-3" epub:type="subchapter">
				<h4 id="id00054">III.</h4>
				<p id="id00055">Old Jenny sat in the rocking-chair by the fireguard in the nursery. She wore a black net cap with purple rosettes above her ears. You could look through the black net and see the top of her head laid out in stripes of grey hair and pinky skin.</p>
				<p id="id00056">She had a grey face, flattened and wide-open like her eyes. She held it tilted slightly backwards out of your way, and seemed to be always staring at something just above your head. Jenny’s face had tiny creases and crinkles all over it. When you kissed it you could feel the loose flesh crumpling and sliding softly over the bone. There was always about her a faint smell of sour milk.</p>
				<p id="id00057">No use trying to talk to Jenny. She was too tired to listen. You climbed on to her lap and stroked her face, and said “Poor Jenny. Dear Jenny. Poor Jenny-Wee so tired,” and her face shut up and went to sleep. Her broad flat nose drooped; her eyelids drooped; her long, grey bands of hair drooped; she was like the white donkey that lived in the back lane and slept standing on three legs with his ears lying down.</p>
				<p id="id00058">Mary loved old Jenny next to Mamma and Mark; and she loved the white donkey. She wondered why Jenny was always cross when you stroked her grey face and called her “Donkey-Jenny.” It was not as if she minded being stroked; because when Mark or Dank did it her face woke up suddenly and smoothed out its creases. And when Roddy climbed up with his long legs into her lap she hugged him tight and rocked him, singing Mamma’s song, and called him her baby.</p>
				<p id="id00059">He wasn’t. <em>She</em> was the baby; and while you were the baby you could sit in people’s laps. But old Jenny didn’t want her to be the baby.</p>
				<p id="id00060">The nursery had shiny, slippery yellow walls and a brown floor, and a black hearthrug with a centre of brown and yellow flowers. The greyish chintz curtains were spotted with small brown leaves and crimson berries. There were dark-brown cupboards and chests of drawers, and chairs that were brown frames for the yellow network of the cane. Soft bits of you squeezed through the holes and came out on the other side. That hurt and made a red pattern on you where you sat down.</p>
				<p id="id00061">The tall green fireguard was a cage. When Jenny poked the fire you peeped through and saw it fluttering inside. If you sat still you could sometimes hear it say “teck-teck,” and sometimes the fire would fly out suddenly with a soft hiss.</p>
				<p id="id00062">High above your head you could just see the gleaming edge of the brass rail.</p>
				<p id="id00063">“Jenny⁠—where’s yesterday and where’s tomorrow?”</p>
			</section>
			<section id="chapter-1-4" epub:type="subchapter">
				<h4 id="id00064">IV.</h4>
				<p id="id00065">When you had run a thousand hundred times round the table you came to the blue house. It stood behind Jenny’s rocking-chair, where Jenny couldn’t see it, in a blue garden. The walls and ceilings were blue; the doors and staircases were blue; everything in all the rooms was blue.</p>
				<p id="id00066">Mary ran round and round. She loved the padding of her feet on the floor and the sound of her singsong:</p>
				<p id="id00067">“The pussies are blue, the beds are blue, the matches are blue and the mousetraps and all the litty mouses!”</p>
				<p id="id00068">Mamma was always there dressed in a blue gown; and Jenny was there, all in blue, with a blue cap; and Mark and Dank and Roddy were there, all in blue. But Papa was not allowed in the blue house.</p>
				<p id="id00069">Mamma came in and looked at her as she ran. She stood in the doorway with her finger on her mouth, and she was smiling. Her brown hair was parted in two sleek bands, looped and puffed out softly round her ears, and plaited in one plait that stood up on its edge above her forehead. She wore a wide brown silk gown with falling sleeves.</p>
				<p id="id00070">“Pretty Mamma,” said Mary. “In a blue dress.”</p>
				<h4 id="id00071">V.</h4>
				<p id="id00072">Every morning Mark and Dank and Roddy knocked at Mamma’s door, and if Papa was there he called out, “Go away, you little beasts!” If he was not there she said, “Come in, darlings!” and they climbed up the big bed into Papa’s place and said “Good morning, Mamma!”</p>
				<p id="id00073">When Papa was away the lifted curtain spread like a tent over Mary’s cot, shutting her in with Mamma. When he was there the drawn curtain hung straight down from the head of the bed.</p>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
