<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>III</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-3" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2 id="id00257" style="margin-top: 4em">III</h2>
			<h4 id="id00258" style="margin-top: 2em">I.</h4>
			<p id="id00259">Jenny was cross and tugged at your hair when she dressed you to go to<br/>
			Chadwell Grange.<br/></p>
			<p id="id00260">“Jenny-Wee, Mamma says if I’m not good Aunt Bella will be ill. Do you think it’s really true?”</p>
			<p id="id00261">Jenny tugged. “I’d thank you for some of your Aunt Bella’s illness,” she said.</p>
			<p id="id00262">“I mean,” Mary said, “like Papa was in the night. Every time I get ’cited and jump about I think she’ll open her mouth and begin.”</p>
			<p id="id00263">“Well, if she was to you’d oughter be sorry for her.”</p>
			<p id="id00264">“I <i>am</i> sorry for her. But I’m frightened too.”</p>
			<p id="id00265">“That’s not being good,” said Jenny. But she left off tugging.</p>
			<p id="id00266">Somehow you knew she was pleased to think you were not really good at Aunt Bella’s, where <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Fisher dressed and undressed you and you were allowed to talk to Pidgeon.</p>
			<p id="id00267">Roddy and Dank said you ought to hate Uncle Edward and Pidgeon and <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Fisher, and not to like Aunt Bella very much, even if she was Mamma’s sister. Mamma didn’t really like Uncle Edward; she only pretended because of Aunt Bella.</p>
			<p id="id00268">Uncle Edward had an ugly nose and a yellow face widened by his black whiskers; his mouth stretched from one whisker to the other, and his black hair curled in large tufts above his ears. But he had no beard; you could see the whole of his mouth at once; and when Aunt Bella came into the room his little blue eyes looked up off the side of his nose and he smiled at her between his tufts of hair. It was dreadful to think that Mark and Dank and Roddy didn’t like him. It might hurt him so much that he would never be happy again.</p>
			<p id="id00269">About Pidgeon she was not quite sure. Pidgeon was very ugly. He had long stiff legs, and a long stiff face finished off with a fringe of red whiskers that went on under his chin. Still, it was not nice to think of Pidgeon being unhappy either. But <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Fisher was large and rather like Aunt Bella, only softer and more bulging. Her round face had a high red polish on it always, and when she saw you coming her eyes twinkled, and her red forehead and her big cheeks and her mouth smiled all together a fat, simmering smile. When you got to the black and white marble tiles you saw her waiting for you at the foot of the stairs.</p>
			<p id="id00270">She wanted to ask <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Fisher if it was true that Aunt Bella would be ill if she were naughty; but a squeezing and dragging came under her waist whenever she thought about it, and that made her shy and ashamed. It went when they left her to play by herself on the lawn in front of the house.</p>
			<p id="id00271">Aunt Bella’s house was enormous. Two long rows of windows stared out at you, their dark green storm shutters folded back on the yellow brick walls. A third row of little squeezed-up windows and little squeezed-up shutters blinked in the narrow space under the roof. All summer a sweet smell came from that side of the house where cream-coloured roses hung on the yellow walls between the green shutters. There was a cedar tree on the lawn and a sun-dial and a stone fountain. Goldfish swam in the clear greenish water. The flowers in the round beds were stiff and shining, as if they had been cut out of tin and freshly painted. When you thought of Aunt Bella’s garden you saw calceolarias, brown velvet purses with yellow spots.</p>
			<p id="id00272">She could always get away from Aunt Bella by going down the dark walk between the yew hedge and the window of <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Fisher’s room, and through the stable-yard into the plantation. The cocks and hens had their black timber house there in the clearing, and Ponto, the Newfoundland, lived all by himself in his kennel under the little ragged fir trees.</p>
			<p id="id00273">When Ponto saw her coming he danced on his hind legs and strained at his chain and called to her with his loud, barking howl. He played with her, crawling on his stomach, crouching, raising first one big paw and then the other. She put out her foot, and he caught it and held it between his big paws, and looked at it with his head on one side, smiling. She squealed with delight, and Ponto barked again.</p>
			<p id="id00274">The stable bell would ring while they played in the plantation, and Uncle Edward or Pidgeon or <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Fisher would come out and find her and take her back into the house. Ponto lifted up his head and howled after her as she went.</p>
			<p id="id00275">At lunch Mary sat quivering between Mamma and Aunt Bella. The squeezing and dragging under her waist had begun again. There was a pattern of green ivy round the dinner plates and a pattern of goats round the silver napkin rings. She tried to fix her mind on the ivy and the goats instead of looking at Aunt Bella to see whether she were going to be ill. She <i>would</i> be if you left mud in the hall on the black and white marble tiles. Or if you took Ponto off the chain and let him get into the house. Or if you spilled the gravy.</p>
			<p id="id00276">Aunt Bella’s face was much pinker and richer and more important than<br/>
			Mamma’s face. She thought she wouldn’t have minded quite so much if<br/>
			Aunt Bella had been white and brown and pretty, like Mamma.<br/></p>
			<p id="id00277">There⁠—she had spilled the gravy.</p>
			<p id="id00278">Little knots came in Aunt Bella’s pink forehead. Her face loosened and swelled with a red flush; her mouth pouted and drew itself in again, pulled out of shape by something that darted up the side of her nose and made her blink.</p>
			<p id="id00279">She thought: “I know⁠—I know⁠—I <i>know</i> it’s going to happen.”</p>
			<p id="id00280">It didn’t. Aunt Bella only said, “You should look at your plate and spoon, dear.”</p>
			<p id="id00281">After lunch, when they were resting, you could feel naughtiness coming on. Then Pidgeon carried you on his back to the calf-shed; or <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Fisher took you up into her bedroom to see her dress.</p>
			<p id="id00282">In <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Fisher’s bedroom a smell of rotten apples oozed through the rosebud pattern on the walls. There were no doors inside, only places in the wall-paper that opened. Behind one of these places there was a cupboard where <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Fisher kept her clothes. Sometimes she would take the lid off the big box covered with wall-paper and show you her Sunday bonnet. You sat on the bed, and she gave you peppermint balls to suck while she peeled off her black merino and squeezed herself into her black silk. You watched for the moment when the brooch with the black tomb and the weeping willow on it was undone and <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Fisher’s chin came out first by the open collar and <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Fisher began to swell. When she stood up in her petticoat and bodice she was enormous; her breasts and hips and her great arms shook as she walked about the room.</p>
			<p id="id00283">Mary was sorry when she said good-bye to Uncle Edward and Aunt Bella and <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Fisher.</p>
			<p id="id00284">For, always, as soon as she got home, Roddy rushed at her with the same questions.</p>
			<p id="id00285">“Did you let Uncle Edward kiss you?”</p>
			<p id="id00286">“Yes.”</p>
			<p id="id00287">“Did you talk to Pidgeon?”</p>
			<p id="id00288">“Yes.”</p>
			<p id="id00289">“Did you kiss <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Fisher?”</p>
			<p id="id00290">“Yes.”</p>
			<p id="id00291">And Dank said, “Have they taken Ponto off the chain yet?”</p>
			<p id="id00292">“No.”</p>
			<p id="id00293">“Well, then, that shows you what pigs they are.”</p>
			<p id="id00294">And when she saw Mark looking at her she felt small and silly and ashamed.</p>
			<h4 id="id00295" style="margin-top: 2em">II.</h4>
			<p id="id00296">It was the last week of the midsummer holidays. Mark and Dank had gone to stay for three days at Aunt Bella’s, and on the second day they had been sent home.</p>
			<p id="id00297">Mamma and Roddy were in the garden when they came. They were killing snails in a flower-pot by putting salt on them. The snails turned over and over on each other and spat out a green foam that covered them like soapsuds as they died.</p>
			<p id="id00298">Mark’s face was red and he was smiling. Even Dank looked proud of himself and happy. They called out together, “We’ve been sent home.”</p>
			<p id="id00299">Mamma looked up from her flower-pot.</p>
			<p id="id00300">“What did you <i>do</i>?” she said.</p>
			<p id="id00301">“We took Ponto off the chain,” said Dank.</p>
			<p id="id00302">“Did he get into the house?”</p>
			<p id="id00303">“Of course he did,” said Mark. “Like a shot. He got into Aunt Bella’s bedroom, and Aunt Bella was in bed.”</p>
			<p id="id00304">“Oh, <i>Mark</i>!”</p>
			<p id="id00305">“Uncle Edward came up just as we were getting him out. He was in an awful wax.”</p>
			<p id="id00306">“I’m afraid,” Dank said, “I cheeked him.”</p>
			<p id="id00307">“What did you say?”</p>
			<p id="id00308">“I told him he wasn’t fit to have a dog. And he said we weren’t to come again; and Mark said that was all we <i>had</i> come for⁠—to let Ponto loose.”</p>
			<p id="id00309">Mamma put another snail into the flower-pot, very gently. She was smiling and at the same time trying not to smile.</p>
			<p id="id00310">“He went back,” said Mark, “and raked it up again about our chasing his sheep, ages ago.”</p>
			<p id="id00311">“<i>Did</i> you chase the sheep?”</p>
			<p id="id00312">“No. Of course we didn’t. They started to run because they saw Pidgeon coming, and Roddy ran after them till we told him not to. The mean beast said we’d made Mary’s lamb die by frightening its mother. When he only gave it her because he knew it wouldn’t live. <i>Then</i> he said we’d frightened Aunt Bella.”</p>
			<p id="id00313">Mary stared at them, fascinated.</p>
			<p id="id00314">“Oh, Mark, was Aunt Bella ill?”</p>
			<p id="id00315">“Of course she wasn’t. She only says she’s going to be to keep you quiet.”</p>
			<p id="id00316">“Well,” said Mamma, “she won’t be frightened any more. He’ll not ask you again.”</p>
			<p id="id00317">“We don’t care. He’s not a bit of good. He won’t let us ride his horses or climb his trees or fish in his stinking pond.”</p>
			<p id="id00318">“Let Mary go there,” said Dank. “<i>She</i> likes it. She kisses Pidgeon.”</p>
			<p id="id00319">“I don’t,” she cried. “I hate Pidgeon. I hate Uncle Edward and Aunt<br/>
			Bella. I hate <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Fisher.”<br/></p>
			<p id="id00320">Mamma looked up from her flower-pot, and, suddenly, she was angry.</p>
			<p id="id00321">“For shame! They’re kind to <i>you</i>,” she said. “You little naughty, ungrateful girl.”</p>
			<p id="id00322">“They’re <i>not</i> kind to Mark and Dank. That’s why I hate them.”</p>
			<p id="id00323">She wondered why Mamma was not angry with Mark and Dank, who had let<br/>
			Ponto loose and frightened Aunt Bella.<br/></p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
