<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>XVII</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-17" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2 id="id01560" style="margin-top: 4em">XVII</h2>
			<h4 id="id01561" style="margin-top: 2em">I.</h4>
			<p id="id01562">The French nephew was listening. He had been listening for quite a long time, ten minutes perhaps; ever since they had turned off the railway bridge into Ley Street.</p>
			<p id="id01563">They had known each other for exactly four hours and seventeen minutes. She had gone to the Drapers for tea. Rodney had left her on their doorstep and he had found her there and had brought her into the dining-room. That, he declared, was at five o’clock, and it was now seventeen minutes past nine by his watch which he showed her.</p>
			<p id="id01564">It had begun at teatime. When he listened he turned round, excitedly, in his chair; he stooped, bringing his eyes level with yours. When he talked he tossed back his head and stuck out his sharp-bearded chin. She was not sure that she liked his eyes. Hot black. Smoky blurs like breath on glass. Old, tired eyelids. Or his funny, sallowish face, narrowing to the black chin-beard. Ugly one minute, nice the next.</p>
			<p id="id01565">It moved too much. He could say all sorts of things with it and with his shoulders and his hands. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Draper said that was because he was half French.</p>
			<p id="id01566">He was showing her how French verse should be read when Rodney came for her, and <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Dr.</abbr> Draper sent Rodney away and kept her for dinner.</p>
			<p id="id01567">The French nephew was taking her home now. They had passed the crook of the road.</p>
			<p id="id01568">“And all this time,” she said, “I don’t know your name.”</p>
			<p id="id01569">“Maurice. Maurice Jourdain. I know yours⁠—Mary Olivier. I like it.”</p>
			<p id="id01570">“You wouldn’t if you were me and your father kept on saying, ‘Mary, Mary, quite contrary,’ and ‘Mary had a little lamb.’ ”</p>
			<p id="id01571">“Fathers will do these cruel things. It’s a way they have.”</p>
			<p id="id01572">“Papa isn’t cruel. Only he’s so awfully fond of Mamma that he can’t think about <em>us</em>. He doesn’t mind me so much.”</p>
			<p id="id01573">“Oh⁠—he doesn’t mind you so much?”</p>
			<p id="id01574">“No. It’s Mark he can’t stand.”</p>
			<p id="id01575">“Who is Mark?”</p>
			<p id="id01576">“My brother. Mark is a soldier⁠—Royal Artillery.”</p>
			<p id="id01577">“Lucky Mark. I was to have been a soldier.”</p>
			<p id="id01578">“Why weren’t you?”</p>
			<p id="id01579">“My mother wouldn’t have liked it. So I had to give it up.”</p>
			<p id="id01580">“How you must have loved her. Mark loves my mother more than anything; but he couldn’t have done that.”</p>
			<p id="id01581">“Perhaps Mark hasn’t got to provide for his mother and his sisters. I had. And I had to go into a disgusting business to do it.”</p>
			<p id="id01582">“Oh‑h⁠—”</p>
			<p id="id01583">He was beautiful inside. He did beautiful things. She was charmed, suddenly, by his inner, his immaterial beauty. She thought: “He must be ever so old.”</p>
			<p id="id01584">“But it’s made them love you awfully, hasn’t it?” she said.</p>
			<p id="id01585">His shoulders and eyebrows lifted; he made a queer movement with his hands, palms outwards. He stood still in the path, turned to her, straight and tall. He looked down at her; his lips jerked; the hard, sharp smile bared narrow teeth.</p>
			<p id="id01586">“The more you do for people the less they love you,” he said.</p>
			<p id="id01587">“Your people must be very funny.”</p>
			<p id="id01588">“No. No. They’re simply pious, orthodox Christians, and I don’t believe in Christianity. I’m an atheist. I don’t believe their God exists. I hope he doesn’t. They wouldn’t mind so much if I were a villain, too, but it’s awkward for them when they find an infidel practising any of the Christian virtues. My eldest sister, Ruth, would tell you that I <em>am</em> a villain.”</p>
			<p id="id01589">“She doesn’t really think it.”</p>
			<p id="id01590">“Doesn’t she! My dear child, she’s got to think it, or give up her belief.”</p>
			<p id="id01591">She could see the gable end of Five Elms now. It would soon be over. When they got to the garden gate.</p>
			<p id="id01592">It <em>was</em> over.</p>
			<p id="id01593">“I suppose,” he said, “I must shut the prison door.”</p>
			<p id="id01594">They looked at each other through the bars and laughed.</p>
			<p id="id01595">“When shall I see you again?” he said.</p>
			<h4 id="id01596" style="margin-top: 2em">II.</h4>
			<p id="id01597">She had seen him again. She could count the times on the fingers of one hand. Once, when he came to dinner with <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Dr.</abbr> and <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Draper; once at Sunday supper with the Drapers after Church; once on a Saturday when <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Draper asked her to tea again; and once when he called to take her for a walk in the fields.</p>
			<p id="id01598">Mamma had lifted her eyebrows and <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Draper said, “Nonsense. He’s old enough to be her father.”</p>
			<p id="id01599">The green corn stood above her ankles then. This was the fifth time. The corn rose to her waist. The ears were whitening.</p>
			<p id="id01600">“You’re the only person besides Mark who listens. There was Jimmy. But that was different. He didn’t know things. He’s a darling, but he doesn’t know things.”</p>
			<p id="id01601">“Who is Jimmy?”</p>
			<p id="id01602">“Mark’s friend and mine.”</p>
			<p id="id01603">“<em>Where</em> is he?”</p>
			<p id="id01604">“In Australia. He can’t ever come back, so I shall never see him again.”</p>
			<p id="id01605">“I’m glad to hear it.”</p>
			<p id="id01606">A sudden, dreadful doubt. She turned to him in the narrow path.</p>
			<p id="id01607">“You aren’t laughing at me, are you? You don’t think I’m shamming and showing off?”</p>
			<p id="id01608">“I? I? Laughing at you? My poor child⁠—No⁠—”</p>
			<p id="id01609">“They don’t understand that you can really love words⁠—beautiful sounds. And thoughts. Love them awfully, as if they were alive. As if they were people.”</p>
			<p id="id01610">“They are alive. They’re better than people. You know the best of your<br/>
			Shelley and Plato and Spinoza. Instead of the worst.”<br/></p>
			<p id="id01611">“I should have liked to have known them, too. Sometimes I pretend that I do know them. That they’re alive. That they’re here. Saying things and listening. They’re kind. They never misunderstand. They never lose their tempers.”</p>
			<p id="id01612">“You mustn’t do that,” he said sharply.</p>
			<p id="id01613">“Why not?”</p>
			<p id="id01614">“It isn’t good for you. Talk to me. I’m alive. I’m here, I’ll listen.<br/>
			I’ll never misunderstand. I’ll never lose my temper.”<br/></p>
			<p id="id01615">“You aren’t always here.”</p>
			<p id="id01616">He smiled, secretly, with straight lips, under the funny, frizzy, French moustache. And when he spoke again he looked old and wise, like an uncle.</p>
			<p id="id01617">“Wait,” he said. “Wait a bit. Wait three years.”</p>
			<p id="id01618">“Three years?” she said. “Three years before we can go for another walk?”</p>
			<p id="id01619">He shouted laughter and drew it back with a groan.</p>
			<p id="id01620">She couldn’t tell him that she pretended he was there when he was not there; that she created situations.</p>
			<p id="id01621">He was ill, and she nursed him. She could feel the weight of his head against her arm, and his forehead⁠—hot⁠—hot under her hand. She had felt her hands to see whether they would be nice enough to put on <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Jourdain’s forehead. They were rather nice; cool and smooth; the palms brushed together with a soft, swishing sound like fine silk.</p>
			<p id="id01622">He was poor and she worked for him.</p>
			<p id="id01623">He was in danger and she saved him. From a runaway horse; from a furious dog; from a burning house; from a lunatic with a revolver.</p>
			<p id="id01624">It made her sad to think how unlikely it was that any of these things would ever happen.</p>
			<h4 id="id01625" style="margin-top: 2em">III.</h4>
			<p id="id01626">“<abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Jourdain, I am going to school.”</p>
			<p id="id01627">The corn was reaped and carried. The five elms stood high above the shallow stubble.</p>
			<p id="id01628">“My poor Mary, is it possible?”</p>
			<p id="id01629">“Yes. Mamma says she’s been thinking of it for a long time.”</p>
			<p id="id01630">“Don’t be too hard on your mother till you’re quite sure it wasn’t my aunt.”</p>
			<p id="id01631">“It may have been both of them. Anyhow, it’s awful. Just⁠—just when I was so happy.”</p>
			<p id="id01632">“Just when I was so happy,” he said. “But that’s the sort of thing they do.”</p>
			<p id="id01633">“I knew you’d be sorry for me.”</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
