<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>V</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-5" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2 id="id00368" style="margin-top: 4em">V</h2>
			<h4 id="id00369" style="margin-top: 2em">I.</h4>
			<p id="id00370">The book that Aunt Bella had brought her was called <i>The Triumph Over<br/>
			Midian</i>, and Aunt Bella said that if she was a good girl it would<br/>
			interest her. But it did not interest her. That was how she heard Aunt<br/>
			Bella and Mamma talking together.<br/></p>
			<p id="id00371">Mamma’s foot was tapping on the footstool, which showed that she was annoyed.</p>
			<p id="id00372">“They’re coming to-morrow,” she said, “to look at that house at<br/>
			Ilford.”<br/></p>
			<p id="id00373">“To live?” Aunt Bella said.</p>
			<p id="id00374">“To live,” Mamma said.</p>
			<p id="id00375">“And is Emilius going to allow it? What’s Victor thinking of, bringing her down here?”</p>
			<p id="id00376">“They want to be near Emilius. They think he’ll look after her.”</p>
			<p id="id00377">“It was Victor who <i>would</i> have her at home, and Victor might look after her himself. She was his favourite sister.”</p>
			<p id="id00378">“He doesn’t want to be too responsible. They think Emilius ought to take his share.”</p>
			<p id="id00379">Aunt Bella whispered something. And Mamma said, “Stuff and nonsense! No more than you or I. Only you never know what queer thing she’ll do next.”</p>
			<p id="id00380">Aunt Bella said, “She was always queer as long as I remember her.”</p>
			<p id="id00381">Mamma’s foot went tap, tap again.</p>
			<p id="id00382">“She’s been sending away things worse than ever. Dolls. Those naked ones.”</p>
			<p id="id00383">Aunt Bella gave herself a shake and said something that sounded like<br/>
			“Goo-oo-sh!” And then, “Going to be married?”<br/></p>
			<p id="id00384">Mamma said, “Going to be married.”</p>
			<p id="id00385">And Aunt Bella said “T-t-t.”</p>
			<p id="id00386">They were talking about Aunt Charlotte.</p>
			<p id="id00387">Mamma went on: “She’s packed off all her clothes. Her new ones. Sent them to Matilda. Thinks she won’t have to wear them any more.”</p>
			<p id="id00388">“You mustn’t expect me to have Charlotte Olivier in my house,” Aunt<br/>
			Bella said. “If anybody came to call it would be most unpleasant.”<br/></p>
			<p id="id00389">“I wouldn’t mind,” Mamma said, tap-tapping, “if it was only Charlotte.<br/>
			But there’s Lavvy and her Opinions.”<br/></p>
			<p id="id00390">Aunt Bella said “Pfoo-oof!” and waved her hands as if she were clearing the air.</p>
			<p id="id00391">“All I can say is,” Mamma said, “that if Lavvy Olivier brings her<br/>
			Opinions into this house Emilius and I will walk out of it.”<br/></p>
			<p id="id00392">To-morrow⁠—they were coming to-morrow, Uncle Victor and Aunt Lavvy and<br/>
			Aunt Charlotte.<br/></p>
			<h4 id="id00393" style="margin-top: 2em">II.</h4>
			<p id="id00394">They were coming to lunch, and everybody was excited.</p>
			<p id="id00395">Mark and Dank were in their trousers and Eton jackets, and Roddy in his new black velvet suit. The drawing-room was dressed out in its green summer chintzes that shone and crackled with glaze. Mamma had moved the big Chinese bowl from the cabinet to the round mahogany table and filled it with white roses. You could see them again in the polish; blurred white faces swimming on the dark, wine-coloured pool. You held out your face to be washed in the clear, cool scent of the white roses.</p>
			<p id="id00396">When Mark opened the door a smell of roast chicken came up the kitchen stairs.</p>
			<p id="id00397">It was like Sunday, except that you were excited.</p>
			<p id="id00398">“Look at Papa,” Roddy whispered. “Papa’s excited.”</p>
			<p id="id00399">Papa had come home early from the office. He stood by the fireplace in the long tight frock-coat that made him look enormous. He had twirled back his moustache to show his rich red mouth. He had put something on his beard that smelt sweet. You noticed for the first time how the frizzed, red-brown mass sprang from a peak of silky golden hair under his pouting lower lip. He was letting himself gently up and down with the tips of his toes, and he was smiling, secretly, as if he had just thought of something that he couldn’t tell Mamma. Whenever he looked at Mamma she put her hand up to her hair and patted it.</p>
			<p id="id00400">Mamma had done her hair a new way. The brown plait stood up farther back on the edge of the sloping chignon. She wore her new lavender and white striped muslin. Lavender ribbon streamed from the pointed opening of her bodice. A black velvet ribbon was tied tight round her neck; a jet cross hung from it and a diamond star twinkled in the middle of the cross. She pushed out her mouth and drew it in again, like Roddy’s rabbit, and the tip of her nose trembled as if it knew all the time what Papa was thinking.</p>
			<p id="id00401">She was so soft and pretty that you could hardly bear it. Mark stood behind her chair and when Papa was not looking he kissed her. The behaviour of her mouth and nose gave you a delicious feeling that with Aunt Lavvy and Aunt Charlotte you wouldn’t have to be so very good.</p>
			<p id="id00402">The front door bell rang. Papa and Mamma looked at each other, as much as to say, “<i>Now</i> it’s going to begin.” And suddenly Mamma looked small and frightened. She took Mark’s hand.</p>
			<p id="id00403">“Emilius,” she said, “what am I to say to Lavinia?”</p>
			<p id="id00404">“You don’t say anything,” Papa said. “Mary can talk to Lavinia.”</p>
			<p id="id00405">Mary jumped up and down with excitement. She knew how it would be. In another minute Aunt Charlotte would come in, dressed in her black lace shawl and crinoline, and Aunt Lavvy would bring her Opinions. And something, something that you didn’t know, would happen.</p>
			<h4 id="id00406" style="margin-top: 2em">III.</h4>
			<p id="id00407">Aunt Charlotte came in first with a tight, dancing run. You knew her by the long black curls on her shoulders. She was smiling as she smiled in the album. She bent her head as she bent it in the album, and her eyes looked up close under her black eyebrows and pointed at you. Pretty⁠—pretty blue eyes, and something frightening that made you look at them. And something queer about her narrow jaw. It thrust itself forward, jerking up her smile.</p>
			<p id="id00408">No black lace shawl and no crinoline. Aunt Charlotte wore a blue and black striped satin dress, bunched up behind, and a little hat perched on the top of her chignon and tied underneath it with blue ribbons.</p>
			<p id="id00409">She had got in and was kissing everybody while Aunt Lavvy and Uncle<br/>
			Victor were fumbling with the hat stand in the hall.<br/></p>
			<p id="id00410">Aunt Lavvy came next. A long grey face. Black bands of hair parted on her broad forehead. Black eyebrows; blue eyes that stuck out wide, that didn’t point at you. A grey bonnet, a grey dress, a little white shawl with a narrow fringe, drooping.</p>
			<p id="id00411">She walked slowly⁠—slowly, as if she were still thinking of something that was not in the room, as if she came into a quiet, empty room.</p>
			<p id="id00412">You thought at first she was never going to kiss you, she was so tall and her face and eyes held themselves so still.</p>
			<p id="id00413">Uncle Victor. Dark and white; smaller than Papa, smaller than Aunt Lavvy; thin in his loose frock-coat. His forehead and black eyebrows were twisted above his blue, beautiful eyes. He had a small dark brown moustache and a small dark brown beard, trimmed close and shaped prettily to a point. He looked like something, like somebody; like Dank when he was mournful, like Dank’s dog, Tibby, when he hid from Papa. He said, “Well, Caroline. Well, Emilius.”</p>
			<p id="id00414">Aunt Charlotte gave out sharp cries of “Dear!” and “Darling!” and smothered them against your face in a sort of moan.</p>
			<p id="id00415">When she came to Roddy she put up her hands.</p>
			<p id="id00416">“Roddy⁠—yellow hair. No. No. What have you done with the blue eyes and black hair, Emilius? That comes of letting your beard grow so long.”</p>
			<p id="id00417">Then they all went into the dining-room.</p>
			<p id="id00418">It was like a birthday. There was to be real blancmange, and preserved ginger, and you drank raspberry vinegar out of the silver christening cups the aunts and uncles gave you when you were born. Uncle Victor had given Mary hers. She held it up and read her own name on it.</p>
			<p id="id00419">MARY VICTORIA OLIVIER<br/>
			 1863.<br/></p>
			<p id="id00420">They were all telling their names. Mary took them up and chanted them:<br/>
			“Mark Emilius Olivier; Daniel Olivier; Rodney Olivier; Victor Justus<br/>
			Olivier; Lavinia Mary Olivier; Charlotte Louisa Olivier.” She liked the<br/>
			sound of them.<br/></p>
			<p id="id00421">She sat between Uncle Victor and Aunt Lavvy. Roddy was squeezed into the corner between Mamma and Mark. Aunt Charlotte sat opposite her between Mark and Daniel. She <i>had</i> to look at Aunt Charlotte’s face. There were faint grey smears on it as if somebody had scribbled all over it with pencil.</p>
			<p id="id00422">A remarkable conversation.</p>
			<p id="id00423">“Aunt Lavvy! Aunt Lavvy! Have you brought your Opinions?”</p>
			<p id="id00424">“No, my dear, they were not invited. So I left them at home.”</p>
			<p id="id00425">“I’m glad to hear it,” Papa said.</p>
			<p id="id00426">“Will you bring them next time?”</p>
			<p id="id00427">“No. Not next time, nor any other time,” Aunt Lavvy said, looking straight at Papa.</p>
			<p id="id00428">“Did you shut them up in the stair cupboard?”</p>
			<p id="id00429">“No, but I may have to some day.”</p>
			<p id="id00430">“Then,” Mary said, “if there are any little ones, may I have one?”</p>
			<p id="id00431">“May she, Emilius?”</p>
			<p id="id00432">“Certainly not,” Papa said. “She’s got too many little opinions of her own.”</p>
			<p id="id00433">“What do you know about opinions?” Uncle Victor said.</p>
			<p id="id00434">Mary was excited and happy. She had never been allowed to talk so much. She tried to eat her roast chicken in a business-like, grown-up manner, while she talked.</p>
			<p id="id00435">“I’ve read about them,” she said. “They are dear little animals with long furry tails, much bigger than Sarah’s tail, and they climb up trees.”</p>
			<p id="id00436">“Oh, they climb up trees, do they?” Uncle Victor was very polite and attentive.</p>
			<p id="id00437">“Yes. There’s their picture in Bank’s Natural History Book. Next to the Ornythrincus or Duck-billed Plat-i-pus. If they came into the house Mamma would be frightened. But I would not be frightened. I should stroke them.”</p>
			<p id="id00438">“Do you think,” Uncle Victor said, still politely, “you <i>quite</i> know what you mean?”</p>
			<p id="id00439">“<i>I</i> know,” Daniel said, “she means opossums.”</p>
			<p id="id00440">“Yes,” Mary said. “Opossums.”</p>
			<p id="id00441">“What <i>are</i> opinions?”</p>
			<p id="id00442">“Opinions,” Papa said, “are things that people put in other people’s heads. Nasty, dangerous things, opinions.”</p>
			<p id="id00443">She thought: “That was why Mamma and Papa were frightened.”</p>
			<p id="id00444">“You won’t put them into Mamma’s head, will you, Aunt Lavvy?”</p>
			<p id="id00445">Mamma said, “Get on with your dinner. Papa’s only teasing.”</p>
			<p id="id00446">Aunt Lavvy’s face flushed slowly, and she held her mouth tight, as if she were trying not to cry. Papa was teasing Aunt Lavvy.</p>
			<p id="id00447">“How do you like that Ilford house, Charlotte?” Mamma asked suddenly.</p>
			<p id="id00448">“It’s the nicest little house you ever saw,” Aunt Charlotte said. “But it’s too far away. I’d rather have any ugly, poky old den that was next door. I want to see all I can of you and Emilius and Dan and little darling Mary. Before I go away.”</p>
			<p id="id00449">“You aren’t thinking of going away when you’ve only just come?”</p>
			<p id="id00450">“That’s what Victor and Lavinia say. But you don’t suppose I’m going to stay an old maid all my life to please Victor and Lavinia.”</p>
			<p id="id00451">“I haven’t thought about it at all,” Mamma said.</p>
			<p id="id00452">“<i>They</i> have. <i>I</i> know what they’re thinking. But it’s all settled. I’m going to Marshall and Snelgrove’s for my things. There’s a silver-grey poplin in their window. If I decide on it, Caroline, you shall have my grey watered silk.”</p>
			<p id="id00453">“You needn’t waggle your big beard at me, Emilius,” Aunt Charlotte said.</p>
			<p id="id00454">Papa pretended that he hadn’t heard her and began to talk to Uncle<br/>
			Victor.<br/></p>
			<p id="id00455">“Did you read John Bright’s speech in Parliament last night?”</p>
			<p id="id00456">Uncle Victor said, “I did.”</p>
			<p id="id00457">“What did you think of it?”</p>
			<p id="id00458">Uncle Victor raised his shoulders and his eyebrows and spread out his thin, small hands.</p>
			<p id="id00459">“A man with a face like that,” Aunt Charlotte said, “oughtn’t to <i>be</i> in<br/>
			Parliament.”<br/></p>
			<p id="id00460">“He’s the man who saved England,” said Papa.</p>
			<p id="id00461">“What’s the good of that if he can’t save himself? Where does he expect to go to with the hats he wears?”</p>
			<p id="id00462">“Where does Emilius expect to go to,” Uncle Victor said, “when his John<br/>
			Bright and his Gladstone get their way?”<br/></p>
			<p id="id00463">Suddenly Aunt Charlotte left off smiling.</p>
			<p id="id00464">“Emilius,” she said, “do you uphold Gladstone?”</p>
			<p id="id00465">“Of course I uphold Gladstone. There’s nobody in this country fit to black his boots.”</p>
			<p id="id00466">“I know nothing about his boots. But he’s an infidel. He wants to pull down the Church. I thought you were a Churchman?”</p>
			<p id="id00467">“So I am,” Papa said. “I’ve too good an opinion of the Church to imagine that it can’t stand alone.”</p>
			<p id="id00468">“You’re a nice one to talk about opinions.”</p>
			<p id="id00469">“At any rate I know what I’m talking about.”</p>
			<p id="id00470">“I’m not so sure of that,” said Aunt Charlotte.</p>
			<p id="id00471">Aunt Lavvy smiled gently at the pattern of the tablecloth.</p>
			<p id="id00472">“Do you agree with him, Lavvy?” Mamma had found something to say.</p>
			<p id="id00473">“I agree with him better than he agrees with himself.”</p>
			<p id="id00474">A long conversation about things that interested Papa. Blanc-mange going round the table, quivering and shaking and squelching under the spoon.</p>
			<p id="id00475">“There’s a silver-grey poplin,” said Aunt Charlotte, “at Marshall and<br/>
			Snelgrove’s.”<br/></p>
			<p id="id00476">The blanc-mange was still going round. Mamma watched it as it went. She was fascinated by the shivering, white blanc-mange.</p>
			<p id="id00477">“If there was only one man in the world,” Aunt Charlotte said in a loud voice, “and he had a flowing beard, I wouldn’t marry him.”</p>
			<p id="id00478">Papa drew himself up. He looked at Mark and Daniel and Roddy as if he were saying, “Whoever takes notice leaves the room.”</p>
			<p id="id00479">Roddy laughed first. He was sent out of the room.</p>
			<p id="id00480">Papa looked at Mark. Mark clenched his teeth, holding his laugh down tight. He seemed to think that as long as it didn’t come out of his mouth he was safe. It came out through his nose like a loud, tearing sneeze. Mark was sent out of the room.</p>
			<p id="id00481">Daniel threw down his spoon and fork.</p>
			<p id="id00482">“If he goes, I go,” Daniel said, and followed him.</p>
			<p id="id00483">Papa looked at Mary.</p>
			<p id="id00484">“What are <i>you</i> grinning at, you young monkey?”</p>
			<p id="id00485">“Emilius,” said Aunt Charlotte, “if you send another child out of the room, I go too.”</p>
			<p id="id00486">Mary squealed, “Tee-he-he-he-he-<i>hee</i>! Te-<i>hee</i>!” and was sent out of the room.</p>
			<p id="id00487">She and Aunt Charlotte sat on the stairs outside the dining-room door. Aunt Charlotte’s arm was round her; every now and then it gave her a sudden, loving squeeze.</p>
			<p id="id00488">“Darling Mary. Little darling Mary. Love Aunt Charlotte,” she said.</p>
			<p id="id00489">Mark and Dank and Roddy watched them over the banisters.</p>
			<p id="id00490">Aunt Charlotte put her hand deep down in her pocket and brought out a little parcel wrapped in white paper. She whispered:</p>
			<p id="id00491">“If I give you something to keep, will you promise not to show it to anybody and not to tell?”</p>
			<p id="id00492">Mary promised.</p>
			<p id="id00493">Inside the paper wrapper there was a match-box, and inside the match-box there was a china doll no bigger than your finger. It had blue eyes and black hair and no clothes on. Aunt Charlotte held it in her hand and smiled at it.</p>
			<p id="id00494">“That’s Aunt Charlotte’s little baby,” she said. “I’m going to be married and I shan’t want it any more.</p>
			<p id="id00495">“There⁠—take it, and cover it up, quick!”</p>
			<p id="id00496">Mamma had come out of the dining-room. She shut the door behind her.</p>
			<p id="id00497">“What have you given to Mary?” she said.</p>
			<p id="id00498">“Butter-Scotch,” said Aunt Charlotte.</p>
			<h4 id="id00499" style="margin-top: 2em">IV.</h4>
			<p id="id00500">All afternoon till tea-time Papa and Uncle Victor walked up and down the garden path, talking to each other. Every now and then Mark and Mary looked at them from the nursery window.</p>
			<p id="id00501">That night she dreamed that she saw Aunt Charlotte standing at the foot of the kitchen stairs taking off her clothes and wrapping them in white paper; first, her black lace shawl; then her chemise. She stood up without anything on. Her body was polished and shining like an enormous white china doll. She lowered her head and pointed at you with her eyes.</p>
			<p id="id00502">When you opened the stair cupboard door to catch the opossum, you found a white china doll lying in it, no bigger than your finger. That was Aunt Charlotte.</p>
			<p id="id00503">In the dream there was no break between the end and the beginning. But when she remembered it afterwards it split into two pieces with a dark gap between. She knew she had only dreamed about the cupboard; but Aunt Charlotte at the foot of the stairs was so clear and solid that she thought she had really seen her.</p>
			<p id="id00504">Mamma had told Aunt Bella all about it when they talked together that day, in the drawing-room. She knew because she could still see them sitting, bent forward with their heads touching, Aunt Bella in the big arm-chair by the hearth-rug, and Mamma on the parrot chair.</p>
			<h5 id="id00505">END OF BOOK ONE</h5>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
