<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>XXII</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-22" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2 id="id02505" style="margin-top: 4em">XXII</h2>
			<h4 id="id02506" style="margin-top: 2em">I.</h4>
			<p id="id02507">The consultation had lasted more than an hour.</p>
			<p id="id02508">From the cobbled square outside you could see them through the window, Mamma, Uncle Edward, Uncle Victor and Farmer Alderson, sitting round the dining-room table and talking, talking, talking about Roddy.</p>
			<p id="id02509">It was awful to think that things⁠—things that concerned you⁠—could go on and be settled over your head without your knowing anything about it. She only knew that Papa had made Uncle Victor and Uncle Edward the trustees and guardians of his children who should be under age at his death (she and Roddy were under age), and that Mamma had put the idea of farming in Canada into Uncle Edward’s head, and that Uncle Victor had said he wouldn’t hear of letting Roddy go out by himself, and that the landlord of the Buck Hotel had told Victor that Farmer Alderson’s brother Ben had a big farm somewhere near Montreal and young Jem Alderson was going out to him in March and they might come to some arrangement.</p>
			<p id="id02510">They were coming to it now.</p>
			<p id="id02511">Roddy and she, crouching beside each other on the hearthrug in the drawing-room, waited till it should be over. Through the shut doors they could still distinguish Uncle Edward’s smooth, fat voice from Uncle Victor’s thin one. The booming and baying were the noises made by Farmer Alderson.</p>
			<p id="id02512">“I can’t think what they want to drag <i>him</i> in for,” Roddy said. “It’ll only make it more unpleasant for them.”</p>
			<p id="id02513">Roddy’s eyes had lost their fear; they were fixed in a wise, mournful stare. He stared at his fate.</p>
			<p id="id02514">“They don’t know yet quite <i>how</i> imbecile I am. If I could have gone out quietly by myself they never need have known. Now they’ll <i>have</i> to. Alderson’ll tell them. He’ll tell everybody.⁠ ⁠… I don’t care. It’s their own look-out. They’ll soon see I was right.”</p>
			<p id="id02515">“Listen,” she said.</p>
			<p id="id02516">The dining-room door had opened. Uncle Edward’s voice came out first, sounding with a sort of complacent finality. They must have settled it. You could hear Farmer Alderson stumping his way to the front door. His voice boomed from the step.</p>
			<p id="id02517">“Ah doan’t saay, look ye, ’e’ll mak mooch out of en t’ farst ye-ear⁠—”</p>
			<p id="id02518">“Damn him, you can hear his beastly voice all over the place.”</p>
			<p id="id02519">“Ef yore yoong mon’s dead set to larn fa-armin’, an’ ef ’e’ve got a head on ‘is shoulders our Jem can larn ‘en. Ef ’e ‘<i>aven’t</i>, ah tall yo stra-aight, Mr. Ollyveer, ye med joost’s well tak yore mooney and trow it in t’ mistal.”</p>
			<p id="id02520">Roddy laughed. “<i>I</i> could have told them that,” he said.</p>
			<p id="id02521">“Money?”</p>
			<p id="id02522">“Rather. They can’t do it under two hundred pounds. I suppose Victor’ll stump up as usual.”</p>
			<p id="id02523">“Poor Victor.”</p>
			<p id="id02524">“Victor won’t mind. He’ll do anything for Mamma. They can call it a premium if it makes them any happier, but it simply means that they’re paying Alderson to get rid of me.”</p>
			<p id="id02525">“No. They’ve got it into their heads that it’s bad for you sticking here doing nothing.”</p>
			<p id="id02526">“So it is. But being made to do what I can’t do’s worse.⁠ ⁠… I’m not likely to do it any better with that young beast Alderson looking at me all the time and thinking what a bloody fool I am.⁠ ⁠… They ought to have left it to me. It would have come a lot cheaper. I was going anyhow. I only stayed because of Papa. But I can’t tell <i>them</i> that. After all, I was the only one who looked after him. If I’d gone you’d have had to.”</p>
			<p id="id02527">“Yes.”</p>
			<p id="id02528">“It would even come cheaper,” he said, “if I stayed. I can prove it.”</p>
			<p id="id02529">He produced his pocket sketch-book. The leaves were scribbled over with sums, sums desperately begun and left unfinished, sums that were not quite sure of themselves, sums scratched out and begun again. He crossed them all out and started on a fresh page.</p>
			<p id="id02530">“Premium, two hundred. Passage, twenty. Outfit, say thirty. Two hundred and fifty.</p>
			<p id="id02531">“Land cheap, lumber cheap. Labour expensive. Still, Alderson would be so pleased he might do the job himself for a nominal sum and only charge you for the wood. Funeral expenses, say ten dollars.</p>
			<p id="id02532">“How much does it cost to keep me here?”</p>
			<p id="id02533">“I haven’t an idea.”</p>
			<p id="id02534">“No, but think.”</p>
			<p id="id02535">“I can’t think.”</p>
			<p id="id02536">“Well, say I eat ten shillings’ worth of food per week, that’s twenty-six pounds a year. Say thirty. Clothes, five. Thirty-five. Sundries, perhaps five. Forty. But I do the garden. What’s a gardener’s wages? Twenty? Fifteen?</p>
			<p id="id02537">“Say fifteen. Fifteen from forty, fifteen from forty⁠—twenty-five. How much did Papa’s funeral come to?”</p>
			<p id="id02538">“Oh⁠—Roddy⁠—I don’t know.”</p>
			<p id="id02539">“Say thirty. Twenty-five from two hundred and fifty, two hundred and twenty-five. Deduct funeral. One hundred and ninety-five.</p>
			<p id="id02540">“There you are. One hundred and ninety-five pounds for carting me to<br/>
			Canada.”<br/></p>
			<p id="id02541">“If you feel like that about it you ought to tell them. They can’t make you go if you don’t want to.”</p>
			<p id="id02542">“They’re not making me go. I’m going. I couldn’t possibly stay after the beastly things they’ve said.”</p>
			<p id="id02543">“What sort of things?”</p>
			<p id="id02544">“About my keep and my being no good and making work in the house.”</p>
			<p id="id02545">“They didn’t⁠—they couldn’t.”</p>
			<p id="id02546">“Edward did. He said if it wasn’t for me Mamma wouldn’t have to have<br/>
			Maggie. Catty could do all the work. And when Victor sat on him and said<br/>
			Mamma was to have Maggie whatever happened, he jawed back and said she<br/>
			couldn’t afford both Maggie and me.”<br/></p>
			<p id="id02547">“Catty could do Maggie’s work and I could do Catty’s, if you’d stop. It would be only cleaning things. That’s nothing. I’d rather clean the whole house and <i>have</i> you.”</p>
			<p id="id02548">“You wouldn’t. You only think you would.”</p>
			<p id="id02549">“I would, really. I’ll tell them.”</p>
			<p id="id02550">“It’s no use,” he said. “They won’t let you.”</p>
			<p id="id02551">“I’ll make them. I’ll go and tell Edward and Victor now.”</p>
			<p id="id02552">She had shot up from the floor with sudden energy, and stood looking down at Roddy as he still crouched there. Her heart ached for him. He didn’t want to go to Canada; he wanted to stay with Mamma, and Mamma was driving him away from her, for no reason except that Uncle Edward said he ought to go.</p>
			<p id="id02553">She could hear the dining-room door open and shut again. They were coming.</p>
			<p id="id02554">Roddy rose from the floor. He drew himself up, stretching out his arms in a crucified attitude, and grinned at her.</p>
			<p id="id02555">“Do you suppose,” he said, “I’d let you?”</p>
			<p id="id02556">He grinned at Uncle Edward and Uncle Victor as they came in.</p>
			<p id="id02557">“Uncle Victor,” she said, “Why should Roddy go away? If it’s Maggie, we don’t really want her. I’ll do Catty’s work and he’ll do the garden. So he can stay, can’t he?”</p>
			<p id="id02558">“He <i>can</i>, Mary, but I don’t think he will.”</p>
			<p id="id02559">“Of course I won’t. If you hadn’t waited to mix me up with Alderson I could have cleared out and got there by this time. You don’t suppose I was going to sponge on my mother for ever, do you?”</p>
			<p id="id02560">He stood there, defying Uncle Edward and Uncle Victor, defying their thoughts of him. She wondered whether he had forgotten the two hundred pounds and whether they were thinking of it. They didn’t answer, and Roddy, after fixing on them a look they couldn’t meet, strode out of the room.</p>
			<p id="id02561">She thought: How like Mark he is, with his tight, squared shoulders, holding his head high. His hair was like Mark’s hair, golden brown, close clipped to the nape of his neck. When he had gone it would be like Mark’s going.</p>
			<p id="id02562">“It’s better he should go,” Uncle Victor said. “For his own sake.”</p>
			<p id="id02563">Uncle Edward said, “Of course it is.”</p>
			<p id="id02564">His little blue eyes glanced up from the side of his nose, twinkling. His mouth stretched from white whisker to white whisker in a smile of righteous benevolence. But Uncle Victor’s eyes slunk away as if he were ashamed of himself.</p>
			<p id="id02565">It was Uncle Victor who had paid the two hundred pounds.</p>
			<h4 id="id02566" style="margin-top: 2em">II.</h4>
			<p id="id02567">“Supposing there’s something the matter with him, will he still have to go?”</p>
			<p id="id02568">“I don’t see why you should suppose there’s anything the matter with him,” her mother said. “Is it likely your Uncle Victor would be paying all that money to send him out if he wasn’t fit to go?”</p>
			<p id="id02569">It didn’t seem likely that Victor would have done anything of the sort; any more than Uncle Edward would have let Aunt Bella give him an overcoat lined with black jennet.</p>
			<p id="id02570">They were waiting for Roddy to come back from the doctor’s. Before Uncle Victor left Morfe he had made Roddy promise that for Mamma’s satisfaction he would go and be overhauled. And it was as if he had said “You’ll see then how much need there is to worry.”</p>
			<p id="id02571">You might have kept on hoping that something would happen to prevent Roddy’s going but for the size and solidity and expensiveness of the preparations. You might forget that his passage was booked for the first Saturday in March, that to-day was the first Wednesday, that Victor’s two hundred pounds had been paid to Jem Alderson’s account at the bank in Montreal, and still the black jennet lining of the overcoat shouted at you that nothing <i>could</i> stop Roddy’s going now. Uncle Victor might be reckless, but Uncle Edward and Aunt Bella took no risks.</p>
			<p id="id02572">Unless, after all, Dr. Kendal stopped it⁠—if he said Roddy mustn’t go.</p>
			<p id="id02573">She could hear Roddy’s feet coming back. They sounded like Mark’s feet on the flagged path outside.</p>
			<p id="id02574">He came into the room quickly. His eyes shone, he looked pleased and excited.</p>
			<p id="id02575">Mamma stirred in her chair.</p>
			<p id="id02576">“That’s a bright face. We needn’t ask if you’ve got your passport,” she said.</p>
			<p id="id02577">He looked at her, a light, unresting look.</p>
			<p id="id02578">“How right you are,” he said. “And wise.”</p>
			<p id="id02579">“Well, I didn’t suppose there was much the matter with you.”</p>
			<p id="id02580">“There isn’t.”</p>
			<p id="id02581">He went to the bookshelf where he kept his drawing-blocks.</p>
			<p id="id02582">“I wouldn’t sit down and draw if I were you. There isn’t time.”</p>
			<p id="id02583">“There’ll be less after Saturday.”</p>
			<p id="id02584">He sat down and began to draw. He was as absorbed and happy as if none of them had ever heard of Canada.</p>
			<p id="id02585">He chanted:</p>
			<p id="id02586">“ ‘Cannon to right of them,<br/>
			 Cannon to left of them,<br/>
			 Cannon in front of them<br/>
			 Volleyed and thundered.’ ”<br/></p>
			<p id="id02587">The pencil moved excitedly. Volumes of smoke curled and rolled and writhed on the left-hand side of the sheet. The guns of Balaclava.</p>
			<p id="id02588">“ ‘Into the jaws of Death,<br/>
			 Into the mouth of Hell,<br/>
			 Rode the six hundred.’ ”<br/></p>
			<p id="id02589">A rush of hoofs and heads and lifted blades on the right hand. The horses and swords of the Light Brigade.</p>
			<p id="id02590">“ ‘Theirs not to make reply,<br/>
			 Theirs not to reason why,<br/>
			 Theirs but to do and die’ ”⁠—<br/></p>
			<p id="id02591">“You ought to be a soldier, Roddy, like Mark, not a farmer.”</p>
			<p id="id02592">“Oh wise! Oh right!</p>
			<p id="id02593">“ ‘Forward, the Light Brigade!<br/>
			 Was there a man dismayed?<br/>
			 Not though the soldier knew<br/>
			 Someone had blundered.’ ”<br/></p>
			<h4 id="id02594" style="margin-top: 2em">III.</h4>
			<p id="id02595">She was going up the schoolhouse lane towards Karva, because Roddy and she had gone that way together on Friday, his last evening.</p>
			<p id="id02596">It was Sunday now; six o’clock: the time he used to bring Papa home. His ship would have left Queenstown, it would be steering to the west.</p>
			<p id="id02597">She wondered how much he had really minded going. Perhaps he had only been afraid he wouldn’t be strong enough; for after he had seen the doctor he had been different. Pleased and excited. Perhaps he didn’t mind so very much.</p>
			<p id="id02598">If she could only remember how he had looked and what he had said. He had talked about the big Atlantic liner, and the Canadian forests. With luck the voyage might last eleven or twelve clear days. You could shoot moose and wapiti. Wapiti and elk. Elk. With his eyes shining. He was not quite sure about the elk. He wished he had written to the High Commissioner for Canada about the elk. That was what the Commissioner was there for, to answer questions, to encourage you to go to his beastly country.</p>
			<p id="id02599">She could hear Roddy’s voice saying these things as they walked over Karva. He was turning it all into an adventure, his imagination playing round and round it. And on Saturday morning he had been sick and couldn’t eat his breakfast. Mamma had been sorry, and at the same time vexed and irritable as if she were afraid that the arrangements might, after all, be upset. But in the end he had gone off, pleased and excited, with Jem Alderson in the train.</p>
			<p id="id02600">She could see Jem’s wide shoulders pushing through the carriage door after Roddy. He had a gentle, reddish face and long, hanging moustaches like a dying Gladiator. Little eyes that screwed up to look at you. He would be good to Roddy.</p>
			<p id="id02601">It would be all right.</p>
			<p id="id02602">She stood still in the dark lane. A disturbing memory gnawed its way through her thoughts that covered it: the way Roddy had looked at Mamma, that Wednesday, the way he had spoken to her. “Oh wise. Oh right!”</p>
			<p id="id02603">That was because he believed she wanted him to go away. He couldn’t believe that she really cared for him; that Mamma really cared for anybody but Mark; he couldn’t believe that anybody cared for him.</p>
			<p id="id02604">“ ‘Into the jaws of Death,<br/>
			 Into the mouth of Hell,<br/>
			 Rode the six hundred.’ ”<br/></p>
			<p id="id02605">Roddy’s chant pursued her up the lane.</p>
			<p id="id02606">The gate at the top fell to behind her. Moor grass showed grey among<br/>
			black heather. She half saw, half felt her way along the sheep tracks.<br/>
			There, where the edge of the round pit broke away, was the place where<br/>
			Roddy had stopped suddenly in front of her.<br/></p>
			<p id="id02607">“I wouldn’t mind a bit if I hadn’t been such a brute to little Mamma. Why <i>are</i> we such brutes to her?” He had turned in the narrow moor-track and faced her with his question: “Why?”</p>
			<p id="id02608">“ ‘Forward, the Light Brigade!<br/>
			 Was there a man dismayed?<br/>
			 Not though the soldier knew<br/>
			 Someone had blundered’ ”⁠—<br/></p>
			<p id="id02609">Hunderd⁠—blundered. Did Tennyson really call hundred hunderd?</p>
			<p id="id02610">The grey curve of the high road glimmered alongside the moor. From the point where her track joined it she could see three lights, two moving, one still. The still light at the turn came from the Aldersons’ house. The moving lights went with the klomp-klomp of hoofs on the road.</p>
			<p id="id02611">Down in the darkness beyond the fields Garthdale lay like a ditch under the immense wall of Greffington Edge. Roddy hated Greffington Edge. He hated Morfe. He <i>wanted</i> to get away.</p>
			<p id="id02612">It would be all right.</p>
			<p id="id02613">The klomp-klomping sounded close behind her. Two shafts of light shot out in front, white on the grey road. Dr. Kendal drove past in his dog-cart. He leaned out over the side, peering. She heard him say something to himself.</p>
			<p id="id02614">The wheels slowed down with a grating noise. The lights stood still. He had pulled up. He was waiting for her.</p>
			<p id="id02615">She turned suddenly and went back up the moor by the way she had come. She didn’t want to see Dr. Kendal. She was afraid he would say something about Roddy.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
