<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>X</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-10" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2 id="id00877" style="margin-top: 4em">X</h2>
			<h4 id="id00878" style="margin-top: 2em">I.</h4>
			<p id="id00879">Mary was ten in eighteen seventy-three.</p>
			<p id="id00880">Aunt Charlotte was ill, and nobody was being kind to her. She had given her Sunday bonnet to Harriet and her Sunday gown to Catty; so you knew she was going to be married again. She said it was prophesied that she should be married in eighteen seventy-three.</p>
			<p id="id00881">The illness had something to do with being married and going continually to <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Marriott’s church and calling on <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Marriott and writing letters to him about religion. You couldn’t say Aunt Charlotte was not religious. But Papa said he would believe in her religion if she went to <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Batty’s church or <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Farmer’s or <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Propart’s. They had all got wives and <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Marriott hadn’t. Papa had forbidden Aunt Charlotte to go any more to <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Marriott’s church.</p>
			<p id="id00882"><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Marriott had written a nice letter to Uncle Victor, and Uncle Victor had taken Papa to see him, and the doctor had come to see Aunt Charlotte and she had been sent to bed.</p>
			<p id="id00883">Aunt Charlotte’s room was at the top of the tall, thin white house in the High Street. There was whispering on the stairs. Mamma and Aunt Lavvy stood at the turn; you could see their vexed faces. Aunt Charlotte called to them to let Mary come to her. Mary was told she might go if she were very quiet.</p>
			<p id="id00884">Aunt Charlotte was all by herself sitting up in a large white bed. A Bible propped itself open, leaves downwards, against the mound she made. There was something startling about the lengths of white curtain and the stretches of white pillow and counterpane, and Aunt Charlotte’s very black eyebrows and hair and the cover of the Bible, very black, and her blue eyes glittering.</p>
			<p id="id00885">She was writing letters. Every now and then she took up the Bible and picked out a text and wrote it down. She wrote very fast, and as she finished each sheet she hid it under the bedclothes, and made a sign to show that what she was doing was a secret.</p>
			<p id="id00886">“Love God and you’ll be happy. Love God and you’ll be happy,” she said.</p>
			<p id="id00887">Her eyes pointed at you. They looked wise and solemn and excited.</p>
			<p id="id00888">A wide flat piece of counterpane was left over from Aunt Charlotte. Mary climbed up and sat in it with her back against the foot-rail and looked at her. Looking at Aunt Charlotte made you think of being born.</p>
			<p id="id00889">“Aunt Charlotte, do <em>you</em> know what being born is?”</p>
			<p id="id00890">Aunt Charlotte looked up under her eyebrows, and hid another sheet of paper. “What’s put that in your head all of a sudden?”</p>
			<p id="id00891">“It’s because of my babies. Catty says I couldn’t have thirteen all under three years old. But I could, couldn’t I?”</p>
			<p id="id00892">“I’m afraid I don’t think you could,” Aunt Charlotte said.</p>
			<p id="id00893">“Why not? Catty <em>won’t</em> say why.”</p>
			<p id="id00894">Aunt Charlotte shook her head, but she was smiling and looking wiser and more solemn than ever. “You mustn’t ask too many questions,” she said.</p>
			<p id="id00895">“But you haven’t told me what being born is. I know it’s got something to do with the Virgin Mary.”</p>
			<p id="id00896">Aunt Charlotte said, “Sh-sh-sh! You mustn’t say that. Nice little girls don’t think about those things.”</p>
			<p id="id00897">Her tilted eyes had turned down and her mouth had stopped smiling. So you knew that being born was not frightening. It had something to do with the things you didn’t talk about.</p>
			<p id="id00898">And ye⁠—how could it? There was the Virgin Mary.</p>
			<p id="id00899">“Aunt Charlotte, don’t you <em>wish</em> you had a baby?”</p>
			<p id="id00900">Aunt Charlotte looked frightened, suddenly, and began to cry.</p>
			<p id="id00901">“You mustn’t say it, Mary, you mustn’t say it. Don’t tell them you said it. They’ll think I’ve been talking about the babies. The little babies. Don’t tell them. Promise me you won’t tell.”</p>
			<h4 id="id00902" style="margin-top: 2em">II.</h4>
			<p id="id00903">“Aunt Lavvy⁠—I wish I knew what you thought about Jehovah?”</p>
			<p id="id00904">When Aunt Lavvy stayed with you Mamma made you promise not to ask her about her opinions. But sometimes you forgot. Aunt Lavvy looked more than ever as if she was by herself in a quiet empty room, thinking of something that wasn’t there. You couldn’t help feeling that she knew things. Mamma said she had always been the clever one, just as Aunt Charlotte had always been the queer one; but Aunt Bella said she was no better than an unbeliever, because she was a Unitarian at heart.</p>
			<p id="id00905">“Why Jehovah in particular?” Aunt Lavvy was like Uncle Victor; she listened politely when you talked to her, as if you were saying something interesting.</p>
			<p id="id00906">“Because he’s the one you’ve got to believe in. Do you really think he is so very good?”</p>
			<p id="id00907">“I don’t think anything. I don’t know anything, except that God is love.”</p>
			<p id="id00908">“Jehovah wasn’t.”</p>
			<p id="id00909">“Jehovah⁠—” Aunt Lavvy stopped herself. “I mustn’t talk to you about it⁠—because I promised your mother I wouldn’t.”</p>
			<p id="id00910">It was very queer. Aunt Lavvy’s opinions had something to do with religion, yet Mamma said you mustn’t talk about them.</p>
			<p id="id00911">“I promised, too. I shall have to confess and ask her to forgive me.”</p>
			<p id="id00912">“Then,” said Aunt Lavvy, “be sure you tell her that I didn’t talk to you.<br/>
			Promise me you’ll tell her.”<br/></p>
			<p id="id00913">That was what Aunt Charlotte had said. Talking about religion was like talking about being born.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
